TH              E  4 8  LA         WS    OF
p
o
W
E
R
RO              BERT  GREEN        E
A   JO          OST  ELFFERS  PR   OD         UCTI   ON
p
PROFILE BOOKS

page intentionally left blank

This paperback editon published in 2000
Reprinted 2001, 2002
First published in Great Britain in 1998 by
Profile Books Ltd
58A Ratton Garden
London ECIN 8L
First published in the United States in 1998 by
Viking, a division of Penguin Pta                                                                                   Inc.
Copyright © Robert Greene and Joost Elffers, 1998
A portion of this work first appeared in 1e Utne Reader
Typeset in BE Baskerville
Printed and bound in Itay by
Legoprint S.p.a. - Lavis (TN)
The moral right of the authors has been asserted.
A                                                                                                                   rights reserved.Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publicaton may be
reproduced, stored or intoduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright
owner and the publisher of this book.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available fom the Britsh Library.
ISBN 1 86197 278 4

A Treasury ofJewish Folklore by Nathan Ausubel. Copyright © 1948, 1976 by Crown Publishers, lnc. Reprinted by
permission of Crown Publishers, lnc.
The Chinese Lookin Glss by Dennis Bloodworth. Copyright © 1966,1967 by Dennis Bloodworth. By permission of
Ferrar, Staus and Giroux.
The Book ofthe Courtier by Baldesar Castglione, tanslated by George BuH; Penguin Books (London). Copyright ©
George BuH, 1967
The Golen Dream: Seekers ofEI Dorado by Walker Chapman; Bobbs-Merrill. Copyright © 1967 by Walker Chapman.
The Borgias by lvan Cloulas, tanslated by Gilda Roberts; Franklin Watts, lnc. Copyright © 1987 by Librairie
Artheme Fayard. Translation copyright © 1989 by Franklin Watts, lnc.
Various Fahlesfom Vrious Plces, edited by Diane Di Pima; Capricom Books / G. P. Putnam's Sons. © 1960 G. P.
Putam's Sons.
Armenian Folk-tales and Fahls, tanslated by Charles Downing; Oxford University Press. © Charles Downing 1972.
The Littl Brown Book ofAnecdotes, edited by Clifton Fadiman; Little, Brown and Company. Copyright © 1985 by
Little, Brown and Company (lnc.)
The Power ofthe Charltan by Grete de Francesco, translated by Miria                                                 Beard. Copyright, 1939,by Yale University
Press. By permission of Yale University Press.
The Orade: A Manual ofthe Art ofDiscretion by Baltasar Gracian, tanslated by L. B. Walton; Orion Press.
Behind the Seenes ofRoyal Palces in Korea (i                                                                        Dnast) by Ha Tae-hung. Copyright © 1983 by Ha Tae-hung. By permis­
sion of Yonsei University Pess, Seoul.
The Histories by Herodotus, translated by Aubrey de Selincourt, revised by A. R. Bum; Penguin Books (London).
Copyright © the Estate of Aubrey de Selincourt, 1954. Copyright © A. R. Bum, 1972.
Hollywoodby Garson Kanin (Viking). Copyright © 1967,1974 by T F T Corporaton.
Fahlesfom Africa, coHected by J an Knappert; Evan Brothers Limited (London). CoHecton © 1980 J an Knappert.
The Great Fahls ofAll Nations, selected by Manuel Komroff; Tudor Publishing Company. Copyright, 1928, by Dial
Pess, lnc.
Selected Fahls by Jean de L Fontaine, translated by JamesMichie; Penguin Books (London). Translaton copyright
© James Michie, 1979.
The Romance ofthe Rose by Guillaume de Lorris, translated by Charles Dahlberg; Pinceton University Press.
The Complete Esays by Michel de Montaigne, tanslated by M. A. Screech; Penguin Books (London). Translation
copyright © M. A. Screech, 1987, 1991.
A Book ofFive Rins by Miyamoto Musashi, translated by Victor Harris; Overlook Press. Copyright © 1974 by Victor
Harris.
The New Oxfrd Annotated Bihle with the Apocrypha, revised standard version, edited by Herbert G. May and Bruce M.
Metger; Oxford University Pess. Copyright © 1973 by Oxford University Press, lnc.
Makers ofRome: Nine Lives by Plutarch, translated by lan Scott-Kilvert; Penguin Books (London). Copyright © lan
Scott-Kilvert, 1965.
The Rie and Fall ofAthens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch, tanslated by lan Scott-Kilvert; Penguin Books (London).
Copyright © lan Scott-Kilvert, 1960.
Cha-no-yu: TheJapanese Tea Ceremony by A. L. Sadler; Charles E. Tuttle Company. © 1962 by Charles E. Tuttle Co.
Amoral Politics: The Persitent Truth ofMachiavelism by Ben-Ami Scharfstein; State University of New York Press.
© 1995 State University of New York.
Caravan ofDreams by ldries Shah; Octagon Press (London). Copyright © 1970, 1980 by ldries Shah.
Tales ofthe Dervihes by ldries Shah. Copyright © ldries Shah, 1967 Used by permission of Penguin Putam lnc. and
Octagon Press (London).
The Craf of Power by R. G. H. Siu; John Wiley & Sons. Copyright © 1979 by John Wiley & Sons, lnc.
The Suhtl Ruse: The Book ofArahic Wisdom and Guile, tanslated by Rene R. Khawa                                      ; East-West Publicatons. Copy­
right © 1980 English translaton East-West Publicatons (U.K.) Ltd.
T                                                                                                                   Art ofWar by Sun-tzu, translated by Thomas Clea                                                    , Shambhala Publicatons. © 1988 by Thomas Cleary.
The Art ofU                                                                                                         r by Sun-tzu, translated by Yuan Shibing. © 1987 by General Tao Hanshang. Used by permission of
SterlingPublishing Co., lnc., 387 Park Avenue South,New York,                                                       N                                                                                                  10016.
The History ofthe Peloponnesian War by Thucydides, tanslated by Rex Wamer; Penguin Books (London). Translaton
copyright Rex Wa                                                                                                    er, 1954.
The Thurher Carnivalby James Thurber; HarperCollins. Copyright 1945 by James Thurber.
The Court Artit: On the Ancestry ofthe Moder Artist byMartn Wa                                                      e, tanslated by David McLintock. Translaton ©
Maison des Sciences de I'Homme and Cambridge University Pess 1993. By permission of Cambridge University
Press.
The Con Game and                                                                                                    "llow Kid" Weil: The Autohiography ofthe Famous Con Artist as told to W. T Brannon; Dover Publi­
catons. Copyrigt © 1948 by W T. Brannon.

page intentionally left blank

T Anna BilT, and to my paTent
R.G.

page intentionally left blank

ACKNOWLEDGM                                                                                        ENTS
First I would like to thak Anna Biller, who helped edit ad researc tis book, and whose in­
valuable insights played a critical role in the shape ad content of Te 48 Laws. Witout her,
none of this would have been possible.
I must also tank my dea fiend Michiel Schwarz who was responsible for involving me in
the art schoolFabrika in Italy and introducing me there toJoost Elffers, my partner and producer
of Te 48 Laws ofPower.1t was in the scheming world ofFabrika thatJoost and I saw te timeless­
ness of Machiavelli and from our discussions in Venice, Italy, tis book was bor.
I would like to thank Renri L Goubin, who supplied me with many                                    Machiavellian anec­
dotes over the years, partculaly conceming the numerous French characters who play such a
large role in this book.
I would also like to thank Les and Sumiko Biller, who lent me their library onJapanese his­
tory and helped me with theJapanese Tea Ceremony part of the book. Similarly, I must thank
my good fiend Elizabeth Yang who advised me on Chinese history.
A book like this depended greatly on the reseach material available and I am particularly
gratenIl to te UCLA Research Libray; I spent many pleasant days wandering through its in­
compaable collections.
My  parents, Laurette  and Stanley Green,  deserve  endless thanks for  their  patience  and
support.
And I must not forget to pay tibute to my cat, Boris, who kept me company troughout the
never-ending days of writing.
Finally, to those people in my life who have so skillflly used the game of power to manipu­
late, torture, and cause me pain over the years, I bear you no grudges and I thank you for sup­
plying me with inspiration for Te 48 Laws ofPower.
Rohert Greene
viii                                                                                               A CK N O W L E D G M E NTS

CONTENTS
PREFACE  pagexvii
LAW  1  page 1
NEVER OUTSHINE THE MASTER
Always make those above you feel comfortably superior. In your desire to plase or impress them, do not go
too far in displaying your talnts or you might accomplish the                                                oosite-inspire fear and insecurt. Make
your masters apear more brlliant than the are and you will attain the heights of powe
LAW  2  page 8
NEVER PUT TOO MUCH TRUST IN FRIENDS,
LEARN HOW TO USE ENEMIES
Be wary of fiends-the will betray you                                                                        m                                        quickly, for the ar easily aroused to envy. The also become
spoild and trannical. But hire a f                                                                           o                                        enemy and he will be more loal than afiend, because he has    m
to prve. In fact, you have more to fearfm fiiends thanfom enemies. I you have no eneies, find a way to
make them.
LAW  3  page 16
CONCEAL YOUR INTENTIONS
Kee peol off-balnce and in the dark l neer reealing the purpose behind your actions. I the have no
clue what you are up to, the cannot prare a defense. Guide them far enough dwn the wrng path, envelo
them in enough smoke, and l the time the ralize your intntions, it wil be too lte.
LAW  4  page 31
ALWAYS SAY LESS THAN NECESSARY
Wen you are trying to impress peol with words, the more you say, the more common you apear and the lss
in control. Even i you are saying something banal, it will seem orgnal i you make it vague, oen-ded,
and sphinxlike. Powerful peol impress and intimidate l saying lss. The more you say, the                     m                                        likely you
are to say something foolish.
LAW  5  page 37
SO MUCH DEPENDS ON REPUTATION-GUARD IT WITH YOUR LIFE
Rutation is the coestone of powe. Through reutation alone you can intimidate and win; once it slips,
howeer you are vulnerabl, and will be attacked on al sides. Make your rutation unassailbl. Always be
al to potential attacks and thwart them beore the hapen. Meanwhil, lam to destr your                         e                                        ies l
oening hols in their own reutations. Then stand asid and Lt public oinion hang them.
LAW  6  page44
COURT ATTENTION AT ALL COST
Everthing is judged l its apearance; what is unseen counts for nothing. Neer Lt yoursel get lst in the
cowd, then, or buried in oblivion. Stand out. Be conspicuous, at all cost. Make yoursela magnet of atttion
l apearng large more colorful, more mysterous than the blnd and timid masses.
CONTENTS                                                                                                     i

LAW  7  page 56
GET OTHERS TO DO THE WORK FOR YOU, BUT ALWAYS TAKE THE CREDIT
Use the wisdom, knowldge, and lgwork of other peol to furker your own cause. Not only will such assis­
tance save you valuabl time and energ, it will gve you a gdlike aur of ecienc and speed. In the end
your helpers will be forgotten and you will be rembered. Never do yourselwhat others can do for you.
LAW   S  pag e 62
MAKE OTHER PEOPLE COME TO YOU-USE BAIT IF NECESSARY
When you force the other peson to act, you are the one in control. It is always better to make your oonent
come to you, abandoning his own plans in the prcess. Lure him with fabulous gains-then attack. You hol
the cards.
LAW<  page 69
WIN THROUGH YOUR ACTIONS, NEVER THROUGH ARGUMENT
Any momentar trumph you think you have gained through arument is really a Prrhic victory: The resent­
ment and ill will you stir up is stronger and !asts longer than any momentar change of oinion. It is much
more powerful to get othes to agee with you through your actions, without saying a word. Demonstrate, do
not explicate.
LAW  10  page 76
INFECTION: AVOID THE UNHAPPY AND UNLUCKY
You can diefm someone eises miser-emotional states are as infectious as dieases. You may feel you ar
helping the drowning man but you are only precipitating your own diaster. The unfortunate sometimes draw
misfortune on themselves; the will also drw it on you. Associate with the happ and forunate instead.
LAW  1 1   page 82
LEARN TO KEEP PEOPLE DEPENDENT ON YOU
To maintain your indeendence you must always be needd and wanted. The more you are relied on, the more
feedom you have. Make peol deend on you for their happiness and prosperty and you have nothing to fear
Nee teach them enough so that the can do without you.
LAW  I 2   page 89
USE SELECTIVE HONESTY AND GENEROSITY TO DISARM YOUR VICTIM
One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of dishonest ones. oen-hearted gestures of honesty and
geneosit brng down the guard of een the most suspicious peopl. Once your selctive honest oens a hol in
their armor you can deceive and manipulate them at will. A timely gf-a Trojan horse-wil sere the same
purpose.
LAW  1.1  page 95
WHEN ASKING FOR HELP, APPEA L TO PEOPLE'S SELF-INTEREST,
NEVER TO THEIR MERCY OR GRATITUDE
I you need to tur to an ally for help, do not bother to remind him of your past assistance and good deeds. He
will find a way to ignore you. Instead, uncover something in your request, or in your alliance with him, that
will benet him, and emphasize it out of all prortion. He will respond enthusiastically when he sees some
thing to be gained for himsel.
x       C O N T E N TS

LAW  14  page 101
POSE AS A FRIEND, WORK AS A SPY
Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies to gather valuabl information that will kee you a ste ahead.
Better still: Play the sp yoursel In polite social encounters, lam to probe. Ask indireet questions to get peol
to reeal their weaknesses and intentions. Thee is no occasion that is not an oporunit for arul sping.
LAW  15  page 107
CRUSH YOUR ENEMY TOTALLY
All gat laders since Moses have known that a feared enemy must be cshed compltely. (Sometimes the
have lamed this the hard way.) I one embe is lf alight, no matter how dimly it smolers, a fire will eentu­
all break out. More is lst through stoing halay than thrugh total annihiltion: The en                             wil recover
and wil sek reng. Crush him, not only in body but in spirt.
LAW   1 6   page 115
USE ABSENCE T O  INCREASE RESPECT AND HONOR
Too much circulation makes the price g down: The more you are seen and heardfom, the more common you
apear. I you are already established in a goup, temporary withdrawal fom it will make you more taled
about, een more admired. You must lam when to lave. Create value through scarcit.
LAW  17  page 123
KEEP OTHERS IN SUSPENDED TERROR: CULTIVATE AN AIR OF UNPREDlCTABILlTY
Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiabl need to see familiarity in other peol' aetions. Your pre­
dietabilit gives them a sense of control. Tm the tabls: Be dliberatel unpdietabl. Behavior that seems to
have no consistenc or purpose wil kee them ofbalnce, and the will wear themselves out trying to explain
your moves. Taken to an extreme, this strateg can intimidate and terrorize.
LAW  1 i  page 130
DO NOT BUILD FORTRESSES TO PROTECT YOURSELF-ISOLATION IS DANGEROUS
The world is dangerus and enemies are eerywkere-eerone has to prteet themselves. A fortress seems the
safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it protect you from-it cuts you off from valuabl in­
fomation, it maes you conspicuous and an eas target. Better to circulte among peol, find allies, mingl.
You are shieldedfm your enemies by the crowd.
LAW  19  page 137
KNOW WHO YOU'RE DEALING WITH-DO NOT OFFEND THE WRONG PERSON
Ther are many diernt kinds of peol in the world, and you can never assume that eerone will react to
your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver some peol and the will send the rest of their lives
seeing reenge. The are wolves in lambs' clothing. Choose your vietims and oonents carefully, then­
nee offend or dceive the wng person.
CONTENTS                                                                                                          Xl

LAW 20  page 145
DO NOT COMMIT TO ANYONE
It is the Jool who always rushes to take sides. Do not commit to any side or cause but yoursel. By maintaining
your indeendence, you become the master oJ others-                                                                    laying peopl against one another making them pursue
you.
LAW 21   page156
P LAY A SUCKER TO CATCH A SUCKER-SEEM DUMBER THAN YOUR MARK
No one likes Jeeling stupider than the next person. The trick, then, is to make your victims Jeel smart-and not
Just smart, but smarter than you are. Once convinced oJ this, the will neer suspect that you may have ultt
rior motives.
LAW 22  page 163
USE THE SURRENDER TACTIC: TRANSFORM WEAKNESS INTO POWER
Wen you are weaker neer fight Jor honor's sake; choose surrender instead. Surrender gives you time to re­
cover time to torment and irritate your conquer time to wait Jor his power to wane. Do not give him the sat­
isJaction oJ fighting and deJeating you-surrender first. By turing the other cheek you inJurate and unsettl
him. Make surende a tool oJ power.
LAW  23   page 171
CONCENTRATE YOUR FORCES
Conserve your Jorces and energies by keeing them concentrted at their strongest point. You gain more b find­
ing a rch mine and mining it deeer than b flittingjom one shallow mine to another-intensity deJeats ex­
tensit eer time. Wen looking Jor soures oJ powe to elate you, find the one ke patrn, the Jat cow who
will give you milk Jor a long time to come.
LAW  24   page 178
P LAY THE PERFECT COURTIER
The perJect courtier thrives in a world where everything reolves around power and political dextert. He has
mastered the art oJ indirection; heflatters, yields to superiors, and asserts power over others in the most oblique
and graceJul manner. Lear and aply the laws oJ courtieship and thee will be no limit to how Jar you can
re in the court.
LAW 25  page 191
RE-CREATE YOURSELF
Do not accet the rls that societ Joists on you. Re-create yoursel by Jorging a ne identit, one that com­
mand attention and neer bores the audience. Be the master oJ your own image rther than ltting others dt
fine it Jor you. Incororate drmatic devices into your public gesturs and actions-your power will be
enhanced and your character will seem larger than life.
LAW 26  page200
KEEP YOUR HANDS C LEAN
You must seem a pargon oJ civilit and eficienc: Your hands are neer soiled b mistakes and nasty deed.
Maintain such a spotlss apearnce b using otkers as scapegoats and cat '-aws to disguise your in­
volvement.
xi                                                                                                                    CONTENTS

LAW 2 7  page215
P LAY ON PEOP LE'S NEED TO B E LIEVE TO CREATE A C U LT LIKE F O L LOWING
Peol have an overhelming desire to believe in something. Become the focal point of such desire b offering
them a cause, a ne faith to follow. Kee your word vague but full of prmise; emphasize enthusiasm over
rationality and clar thinking. Give your ne dicipls rtuals to perorm, ask them to make sacrifi,es on your
behal. In the absence of organized religion and grand causes, your ne belief system will bring you untold
powe
LAW 28  page227
ENTER ACTION WITH BOLDNESS
I you are unsure of a course of action, do not attempt it. Your doubts and hesitations will inect your execu­
tion. Timidit is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you commit thrugh audacity are eas­
ily corrected with more audacit. Everyone admires the bold; no one honors the timid.
LAW 29  page236
P LAN A LL THE WAY TO THE END
The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking into account all the possibl consequences, obstacls,
and twists of fortune that might reverse your hard work and gve the gly to others. By planning to the end
you wil not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know when to sto. Gently guide fortune and help
detemine the future b thinking far ahead.
LAW  30  page245
MAKE YOUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS SEEM EFFORTLESS
Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease. All the toil and practice that go into them, and also
all the clver tricks, must be concealed. Wen you act, act effortlssly, as if you could do much more. Avoid the
temptation of revealing how hard you work-it only rises questions. Teach no one your trcks or the will be
used against you.
LAW  31   page254
CONTROL THE OPTIONS: GET OTHERS TO P LAY WITH THE CARDS YOU DEAL
The best decetions are the ones that seem to give the other person a choice: Your victims feel the are in contral,
but are actually your pupets. Give peole otions that come out in your favor whicheer one the choose. Fore
them to make choices between the lsser of two eils, both of which sere your purose. Put them on the hos of
a dilmma: The are gored whereer the tur.
LAW 32  page263
P LAY TO PEOP LE'S FANTASIES
The truth is ofen avoided because it is ugly and unplasant. Neer apeal to tru,th and realit unless you are
preared for the anger that comes frvm disenchantment. Lie is so harsh and distressing that peol who can
manufacture romance or conjure up fantasy are like oases in the desert: Eveyone flocks to them. There is great
power in taping into the fantasies of the masses.
CONTENTS                                                                                                             xiii

LAW  33  page271
DISCOVER EACH MAN'S THUMBSCREW
Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castl wall. That weakness is usually an insecurit, an uncontrllbl
emotion or need; it can also be a small secret plasure. Either way, once Jound, it is a thumbscre you can tur
to your advantage.
LAW  :H  page282
BE ROYAL IN YOUR OWN FASHION: ACT LIKE A KING TO BE TREATED LIKE ONE
The way you cary yoursel will oße dteine how you are treated: In the lng TUn, apearng vular or com­
mon will make peopl direspect you. For a king respects himsel and inspires the same sentiment in others. By
acting regally and confident oJ your powers, you make yourselseem destined to wear a crwn.
LAW  ,,5  page291
MASTER THE ART OF TIMING
Neer seem to be in a hurr-hurrying betrys a lack oJ contrl ove yoursel and over time. Always seem pa­
tient, as i you know that eerthing will come to you eentualy. Become a dtective oJ the rght moment; sni
out the spirt oJ the times, the trends that will carry you to power. Leam to stand back when the time is not yet
ripe, and to strkefiecely when it has reachedfuition.
LAW  :16  page300
DISDAIN THINGS YOU CANNOT HAVE: IGNORING THEM IS THE BEST REVENGE
By acknowldgng a pett problm you give it existence and crdibilit. The more attention you pay an enemy,
the strng you make him; and a small mistake is oßen mad worse and more viibl when you try tofix it. It
i sometimes best to lave things alne. I there is something you want but cannot have, show contempt Jor it.
The lss interest you reeal, the more superor you seem.
LAW                                                                                                                7  page309
CREATE COMPELLING SPECTACLES
Strking imagery and grand symbolic gestures crate the aura oJ power-eveyone responds to them. Stage spec­
tacls Jor those around you, then, Jull oJ arresting visual and radiant symbol that heighten your pesence.
Dazld b apearnces, no one will notice what you ar really doing.
LAW   g  page317
THINK AS YOU LIKE BUT BEHAVE LIKE OTHERS
I you make a show oJ going against the times, flaunting your unconventional ideas and unorthodox ways,
peol will think that you only want attention and that you look down upon them. The will find a way to
punish you Jor making them Jeel inJerior. It is Jar saJer to blnd in and nurure the common touch. Share your
orgnality only with tolant Jriends and those who ar sure to apreciate your uniqueness.
LAW  :39  page325
STIR UP WATERS TO CATCH FISH
Ang and emotion are strategcally counteroductive. You must always stay calm and objective. But i you
can make your enemies angr whil staying calm yoursel you gain a decided advantage. Put your enemies
off-balnce: Find the chink in their vanit thrugh which you can rttl them and you hold the strings.
xiv                                                                                                                CONTENTS

LAW 40   page 333
DESPISE THE FREE LUNCH
'at is offed JorJee is dangerous-it usually involves either a trck or a hidden oligation. 'at has worh
i worth paying Jor By paying your own way you stay clar oJ gratitude, guilt, and dceit. It i also ofen wise
to pay the Jull prcether i no cutting coes with excellnce. Be lavih with your mone and kee i circu­
lating, Jor genersit is a sign and a magnet Jor power
LAW 41   page 347
AVOID STEPPING INTO A GREAT MAN'S SHOES
'at happens first always appears bette and more orgnal than what comes aer. I you succeed a geat man
or have a Jamous parent, you wil have to accomplih doubl their achiev                                          e                                       ts to outhine them. Do not get
lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not oJ your own making: Establih your own name and identit l
changng course. Slay the overbearing Jather disparge hi lgac, and gain power l shining in your own
way.
LAW 42   page 358
STRIKE THE SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEP WILL SCATTER
Troubl can ofen be traced to a singl strong individual-the stir                                                the arogant underling, the poisone oJ
goodwill. I you allow such peol room to oerate, othes will succumb to their injuence. Do not wait Jor the
troubls the cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with them-the ar irrdemabl. Neutralize their in­
fluence l isolating or banishing them. Strike at the soure oJ the trubl and the shee will scatte.
LAW 4:    page 367
WORK ON THE HEARTS AND MINDS OF OTHERS
Coercion creates a reaction that will eentually work against you. You must seduce others into wantng to
move in your direction. A peson you have seduced becomes your loal pawn. And the way to seduce others is to
oerate on their individual psychologes and weaknesses. Sofen up the rsistant l working on their emotions,
plying on what the hold dear and what the Jear. Ignore the hearts and minds oJ othes and the will gow to
hatyou.
LAW 44   page 376
DISARM AND INFURIATE WITH THE MIRROR EFFECT
The mirror reects realit, but it is also the perJect tool Jor decetion:                                        '                                       you mirr your enemies, doing ex­
actly as the do, the cannot figure out your strateg. The Miror Eect mocks and humiliates them, making
them overeact. By holding up a miror to their psches, you seduce tlem with the illusion that you share their
values; l holding up a miror to their actions, you teach them a lsson. Fe can resit the power oJ the Miror
Effect.
LAW 45   page 392
PREACH THE NEED FOR CHANGE, BUT NEVER REFORM TOO MUCH AT ONCE
Everyone understands the need Jor change in the abstrct, but on the day-today lvel peol are creatures oJ
habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and wil lad to rolt. Iyou are ne to a position oJ power or an
outside tring to build a powe base, make a show oJ respecting the ol way oJ doing things. I change is nec­
essar, make it Jeel like a gentl improvement on the past.
CONTENTS                                                                                                       xv

L AW  46   page 400
NEVER APPEAR TOO PERFECT
Apearng bette than others i always dangeous, but most dangerous of alt is to apear to have no faults or
weaknesses. Env create silnt enemies. It is smart to oeeasionalty disply defeets, and admit to harmlss
viees, in order to dfleet envy and apear more human and apoaehabl. Only gods and the dead can seem
pefeet with impunit.
L AW  47   page 410
DO NOT GO PAST THEMARK YOU AIMED FOR;
IN VICTORY, LEARN WHEN TO STOP
The moment of vietor is ofen the moment of gatest perl. In the heat of vietory, arroganee and overeonfi­
denee ean push you past the gal you had aimed for and b going too far you make more enemies than you
defeat. Do not allw sueeess to go to your head. Thee is no substitute for strteg and earful planning. Set a
goal, and when you reaeh it, sto.
L AW  48   page 419
ASSUME FORMLESSNESS
By taking a shape, b having a visibl plan, you oen yoursel to attaek. Instead of taking a form for your
enemy to grasp, kee yoursel adaptabl and on the move. Aeeet the faet that nothing is eerain and no law is
fixed. The best way to proteet yoursel is to be as fluid and formlss as water; nee bet on stabilit or lasting
order Everything ehanges.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY   page 431
INDEX  page 433
xvi                                                                                                             CONTENTS

P R EFAC E
The feeling of having no power over people and events is generaly un­
bearable to us                                                                     when we feel helpless we feel miserable.No one wats less
power; everyone wants more. In the world today, however, it is dangerous
to seem too power hungry, to be overt with your power moves. We have
to seem fair and decent. S we need to be subtle-congenial yet cunning,
democratc yet devious.
This game of constat duplicity most resembles te power dynamic
that existed in the scheming world of the old aristocratc court. Throughout
history, a court has always formed itself aound the person in power-king,
queen, emperor, leader. The courters who filled                                    t                                                          court were in an espe­
cially delicate position: They had to serve their masters, but i they seemed
t fawn, if they curried favor too obviously, the other courters around
them would notce and would act aganst them. Attempts to win the mas­
ter's favor, then, had to be subtle. And even skilIed courters capable of
such subtlety stll had to protect themselves fom their fellow courters,
who at all moments were scheming to push them aside.
Meanwhile the court was supposed to represent the height of civiliza­
ton and refinement. Violent or overt power moves were frowned upon;
cou                                                                                ers would work silently and secretly against any           aong them who
used  force. This was the courter's dilemma: W hile appearing the very
paragon of elegace, they had to outwit and thwart their own opponents in
the subdest of ways. The successful courter lea                                    ed over time to make all
of his moves indirect; if he stabbed an opponent in the bac, it was with a
velvet gove on his had and the sweetest of sr                                      es on his face. Instead of
using  coercion  or  outright  treachery,  the  perfect   courter  got  his  way
troug seducton, charm, decepton, and subtle stategy, always planning
several moves ahead. Life in the court was a never-ending game that re­
quired constant vigilance and tactical thinking. It was civilized war.
Today  we  face  a peculiarly similar paradox to  that  of te courter:
Everything must appear civilized, decent, democratic, and fair. But if we
play by those rules too stictly, if we take them too literally, we are crushed
by those around us who are not so foolish. As the great Renaissace diplo­
mat and courtier Niccolö                                                           Machiavelli wrote, ''ny man who ties to be
good all the time is bound to come to ruin among te great number who
ae   not good." The court imagined itself the pinnacle of refinement, but un-
PREFACE                                                                            xvii

dereat its glittering surface a cauldron of dark emotions                         greed, envy,
lust, hatred-boiled and simmered.Our world today similarly imagines it­
Courts are, unquestion­
self the pinnacle of fairess, yet the sa                                          e ugly emotions stll stir within us,
ably, the seats ofpolite­
ness and good                                                                     as tey have forever. The game is the same.Outardly, you must seem to
breeding; were they not                                                           respect te niceties, but inwardly, unless you are a fool, you lear quicly
so, they wOllld be the
to be prudent, and to do as Napoleon advised: Place your iron hand inside
seals of slallghter and
a velvet glove. If, like the courter of times gone by, you ca master te arts
desolation. Those who
now smile Ilpon and                                                               of indirection, leaming to seduce, charm, deceive, and subtly outmaneuver
embrace, would afront                                                             your opponents, you will attan the heights of power. You will be able to
and stab, each other,
                                                                                  make people bend to your will without their realizing what you have done.
ifmanners did not
illerpose. .                                                                      And if they do not realize what you have done, they will neither resent nor
LORD CIIESTERHELD,                                                                resist you.
1694-1773
To    some people the noton of consciously playing power games                    no mat­
ter how indirect-seems evil, asocial, a relic of the past. They believe tey
can opt out of te game by behaving in ways that have nothing to do with
power. You must beware of such people, for while they express such opin­
ions  outwardly,  they are ofen among the most adept players at power.
They utlize stategies tat cleverly disguise the nature of the manipulation
There is nothing very
odd abollt lambs                                                                  involved. These types, for exa                                                ple, will ofen display their weakness and
disliking birds ofprey,                                                           lack of power as a kind of moral virtue. But true powerlessness, without
blt this is no reason for
any motive of self-interest, would not publicize its weakness to gan sympa­
holding it against large
thy or respect.Making a show of one's weakness is actually a very effective
birds 0/ prey that they
carry ofnambs. Ami                                                                strategy, subtle and deceptve, in the game of power (see Law 22, the Sur­
when the lambs whis­                                                              renderTactic).
per {lmong themselves,
Another strategy of the supposed nonplayer is to demand equaity in
" These birds ofprey
every area of life. Everyone must be teated alike, whatever their status and
are evii, and does this
not give IlS a right to                                                           strength. But if, t avoid the taint of power, you attempt to treat everyone
say that whatever is Ihe                                                          equally and fairly, you will confont te problem tat some people do cer­
opposite of a bird of
tain things better than oters. Treatng everyone equally means ignoring
prey must be good? "
their  differences,  elevatng  the  less  skillfl  and  suppressing  those  who
there is nothing intrin­
sically wrong with such                                                           excel. Again, may of those who behave this way are actually deploying
an argllment   though                                                             anoter power strategy, redistributng people's rewards in a way that they
the birds of prey will
determine.
look somewhat quizzi­
Yet anoter way of avoiding the game would be perfect honest ad
cally and say, " We have
f/othing against these                                                            staightforwardness, since one of the main techniques of those who seek
good lambs; in fact, we
power is deceit ad secrecy. But being perfectly honest will inevitably hurt
love them; nothing
and insult a great many people, some of whom will choose to injure you in
tastes beller than a
tender lamb. "                                                                    retur. No one will see your honest statement as completely objective and
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,                                                              free of some persona motivaton. And tey will be right: In truth, the use
1844-1900                                                                         of honesty is indeed a power stategy, intended to convince people of one's
noble, good-hearted, selfless character. It is a form of persuasion, even a
subte form of coercion.
Finally, those who claim to be nonplayers may affect an air of navete,
to protect them fom the accusaton  that  they are after power.  Bewae
agan, however, for the appearance of navete can be an effective means of
xviii                                                                             PREFACE

deceit (see Law 21, SeemDumberTha YOUf Mark). And even genuine
naivete  is not free of the snares of power.Children may be nave in many
The only means to gain
ways,  but they ofen act from an elemental need to gain control over those
one:,' ends with people
around them Children suffer greatly from feeling powerless in the adult              are force and cunning
world, ad they use any means available to get their way Genuinely inno­              Love also, Ihey say; bul
that is 10 wait for
cent people may still be playing for power,  and are ofen horribly effectve
sunshine, am/ life needs
at the game,  since they are not hindered by reflection                              Once again,  those
every monzent.
who make a show or display of innocence arete least innocent ofa!
JOHANN VON GOETlII',
1749-1S32                                                                            You can recognize these supposed nonplayers by the way they flaunt
their moral qualities,  their piet,  their exquisite sense ofjustce But since
all of us hunger for power,  and almost all of our actons are aimed at gain­
ing it, the nonplayers are merely throwing dust in OUf eyes,  distractng us
from their power plays with their air of moral superiority If you observe
them closely, you will see in fact that they are ofen the ones most skillfl at
indirect manipulation,  even if some of them practice it unconsciously And           The arrow shot by the
they greatly resent any publicizing of the tactcs they use every day                 archer fllay or fnay not
If the world is like a giant scheming court and we are tapped inside it,             kill a single person, Bul
slralagems devised hy a
there is no use in trying to opt out of the game. That will only render you
wise man can kill even
powerless, and powerlessness will make you miserable. Instead of stug­               habes in Ihe womh,
gling against the inevitable,  instead of arguing and whining and feeling            KAUTILYA,
INDIAN PHILOSOPJlFR,
guilty, it is far better to excel at power.In fact,  the better you are at dealing
rHIRn CENTURY B.C.
with power,  the better friend,  lover,  husbad,  wife,  and person you be­
come By following the route of the perfect courter (see Law24) you lea
to make others feel better about themselves, becoming a SOUfce of pleasure
to them. They will grow dependent on YOUf abilites and desirous of YOUf
presence.By mastering the 48 laws in this book,  you spare others the pain
that comesfom bungling with power-by playing with fire without know­
ing its properties.If the game of power is inescapable,  better to be an artist
than a denier or a bungler
Lea                                                                                  ing the game of power requires a certain way of looking at the world,
a shifng of perspectve It taes effort and years of practice,  for muc  of
the game may not come naturally. Certain basic skills are required,  and
once you master these skills you will be able to apply the laws of power
more easily.
The most important of these skills,  and power's crucial foundation,  is ]
te ability to master your emotons. An emotonal response to a situaton is
the single greatest barrier to power,  a mistake that will cost you a lot more
than any temporary satisfaction you might gan by expressing YOUf feel­
ings Emotions cloud reason,  and if you cannot see the situation clearly,
you cannot prepare for and respond to it with ay degree of conto!
Anger is the most destuctve of emotional responses,  for it clouds
your vision the most.It also has a ripple effect that invariably makes situa­
tons less contollable and heightens your enemy's resolve If you are ty­
ing to destroy an enemy who has hurt you, far better to keep hir off-guard
by feigning friendliness than showing your anger
PREFACE                                                                              xi

Love and affection are also potentially destuctive,  in that they blind
you to the ofen self-serving interests of those whom you least suspect of
I thought to myself
with what means, with                                                            playing a power ga                                                           e.You cannot repress anger or love,  or avoid feeling
what deceptions, with                                                                                                                                         them, and you should not try.But you should be caefl about how you ex­
how many varied arts,                                                                                                                                         press them,  and most important, they should never influence your plans
with what industry a
and strategies in any way.
man sharpens his wits
Related to mastering YOUf emotons is the ability to distance YOUfseif
to deceive another,
and through these                                                                from the present moment ad think objectively about the past and fture.
variations the world is
LikeJanus, the double-faeed Roman deity and guardian of all gates and
made more beautiful.
doorways, you must be able to look in both direetions at onee, the better to
FRANCESCO VETTORI,
CONTEMPORARY AND                                                                 hadle dangerfom wherever it comesSuch is the face you must create for
FRIEND OF                                                                        YOUfself-one face looking contnuously to the fture and the other to the
M ACIIIAVELLI,
EA RLY SIXTEENTH                                                                 past.
CENTLJRY
For the fture,  the motto is, "N o days unalert" N othing should catch
you by surprise because you are constantly imagining problems before
they arise.Instead of spending your time dreaming of YOUf plan's happy
ending, you must work on calculating every possible permutation and pit­
fall that might emerge in it.The frther you see, the more stepsaead you
plan,  the more powerfl you become.
There are no princi­                                                             The other face ofJanus looks constatly to the past-though not to re­
pies; there are only                                                             member past hUftS  or bea grudges. That would only curb YOUf power.
events. There is no
Half of the game is le                                                           a                                                                            ing how to forget those events in the past that eat
good and bad, there are
away at you and doud YOUf reason. The real purpose of the backward­
only circumstances.
The superior man                                                                 glancing eye is to educateYOUfseif eonstantly-you look at the past to lea
espouses events and                                                              from those who came before you. (The many historical  examples in this
circumstances in order
book will greatly help that process) Then,  having looked to the past,  you
to guide them. lf there
look doser at had,  to YOUf own aetions and those of YOUf fiends.This is
were principles and
fixed laws, nations                                                              the most vital school you ean lear from, because it comes from personal
would not change them                                                            experience.
as we change our shirts
You begin by examining the mistakes you have made in the past,  the
and a man can not be
ones that have most grievously held you back. You analyze them in terms
expected to be wiser
than an entire nation.                                                           of the 48 laws of power,  and you extraet fom them a lesson and an oath:
HONORE DF BALZAC,                                                                "I shall never repeat such a  mistake; I shall never fall into such a trap
1799-1850
again" If you can evaluate and observe yourself in this way,  you can lea
to breakte patters of the past-an immensely valuable skill.
Power requires the ability to play with appearanees. To    this end you
must lear to wearmay masks and keep a bag fll of deceptive ticsDe­
cepton and masquerade should not be seen as ugly or immoral.All human
interacton requires decepton on many levels,  and in some ways what sep­
aates humans fom animals is our ability to lie and deceive. InGreek
myths, i India's Mahabharata cyde,  in theMiddleEaster epic ofGilga­
mesh,  it is the privilege of the gods to use deceptive                          a;  a great ma,
Odysseus for instance, wasjudged by his ability to riyal the craftiness of the
gods,  stealing some of their divine power by matching them in wits and de­
cepton.Deeeption is a developed at of civilizaton and the most potent
weapon in the game of power.
xx                                                                               PREFACE

You  cannot  succeed  at  deception  unless  you  take a  somewhat  dis­
taced approach to yourself-unless you can be many different people,
wearing the mask that the day and the moment require. With such a flexi­
ble approach to all appearances, induding your own, you lose a lot of the
inward heaviness that holds people down. Make your face as malleable as
the actor's,  work to  conceal your intentons from  others,  practice luring
people into traps. Playing with appearances and mastering arts of decep­
ton are among the aesthetic pleasures of life. They are also key compo­
nents in the acquisition of power.
If decepton is the most potent weapon in your arsenal, then patience
in all things is your crucial shield. Patience will protect you fom making
moronic blunders. Like mastering your emotions, patience is a skill-it
does  not come naturally.  But nothing about power is  natural;  power is
more  godlike  than  anything  in  the  natura  world.  And  patence  is  the
supreme virtue of the gods, who have nothing but time. Everything good
will happen-the grass will grow again, if you give it time and see several
steps into the future. Impatence, on the other hand, only maes you look
weak. It is a principal impediment to power.
Power is essentially amoral and one of the most important skills to ac­
quire is the ability to see circumstances rather than good or evil. Power is a
game-this cannot be repeated too ofen-and in games you do not judge
your opponents by their intentions but by the effect of their actions. You
measure their strategy and their power by what you ca see and feel. How
ofen are someone's intentons made the issue only to doud and deceive!
What does it matter if another player, your friend or riyal, intended good
things and had only your interests at heat, if the effects of his action lead to
so much ruin and confsion? It is only natural for people to cover up their
actons with all kinds of justifications, always assuming that they have acted
out of goodness. You must lear to inwardly laugh each tme you hear this
ad never get  caught  up  in  gauging  someone's  intentons  and  actions
trough a set of moral judgments that ae really an excuse far the accumu­
laton of power.
It is a game. Your opponent sits opposite you. Both of you behave as
gentlemen or ladies, observing the rules of the game ad taing nothing
personally. You play with a stategy and  you observe your opponent's
moves with as much calmness as you can muster. In the end, you will ap­
preciate the politeness of those you are playing with more than teir good
ad sweet intentions. Train your eye to follow the results of their moves,
the outward circumstances, and do not be distracted by anything else.
Haf of your mastery of power comes fom what you do not do, what
you do not allow yourself to get dragged into. For this skill you must lea
t judge all things by what they cost you. As Nietzsche wrote, "The value of
a                                                                                  tg sometimes lies not in what one attains with it, but in what one pays
for it-what it costsus." Perhaps you will attain your goal, and a worthy goal
a that, but at what price? Apply this standard to everything, induding
whether to collaborate with other people or come to their aid. In the end,
PREFACE                                                                            xxi

life is short, opportunites are few, and you have only so muc energy to
draw on. And in this sense tme is as importat a consideration as ay
other. Never waste valuable time, or mental peace of mind, on the affairs of
others-that is too high a price to pay.
Power is a social game. To  leam and master it, you must develop the
ability to study and understand people. As the great seventeenth-century
thinker and courter Baltasar Graciän wrote: "Many people spend tme
studying the properties of animals or herbs; how much more important it
would be to study those of people, with whom we must live or die!" To  be a
master player you must also be a master psychologist. You must recognize
motvations and see through the cloud of dust with which people surround
their actons. An understanding of people's hidden motves is the single
greatest piece of knowledge you ca have in acquiring power. It opens up
endless possibilities of decepton, seducton, and manipulaton.
People ae of infinite complexty ad you can spend a lifetime watch­
ing them without ever flly understanding them. S it is all the more im­
portant, then, to begin your educaton now. In doing so you must also keep
(                                                                              one principle in mind: Never discriminate as to whom you study and
i                                                                              whom you trust. Never tust anyone completely and study everyone, in­
cluding fiends and loved ones.
Finally, you must lea always to take the indirect route to power. Dis­
guise your cunning. Like a billiad ball that caroms several tmes before it
hits its target, your moves must be planned and developed in the least ob­
vious way. By training yourself to be indirect, you can thrive in the modem
court, appeaing the paragon of decency while being the consummate ma­
nipulator.
Consider                                                                       T                                                                      48 Laws of Power a kind of handbook on the   a   of indirec­
ton. The laws ae based on the writings of men and women who have
studied and mastered the game of power. These writngs span a period of
more than three thousand years ad were created in civilizations as dis­
parate as ancient China and Renaissance Italy; yet they share common
threads and themes, together hinting at an essence of power that has yet to
be flly aculated. The 48 laws of power are the distillaton of this accu­
mulated wisdom, gathered from the writings of the most illustrious strate­
gists                                                                          (Sun-tzu, Clausewitz), statesmen                                       (Bismarck, Talleyrand),  courters
(Castiglione, Graciä), seducers (Ninon de Lenclos, Casaova), ad con
artists ("Yellow Kid" Weil) in history.
The laws have a simple premise: Certain actons amost always in­
crease one's power (the observance of the law), while others decrease it
ad even ruin us (the tansgression of the law). These transgressions and
observaces are illustrated by historical examples. The laws are timeless
ad definitive.
Te 48 Laws of Power can be used in several ways. By reading the book
staight through you can lea about power in general. Although several of
the laws may seem not to pertain directly to your life, in tme you will
xxii                                                                           PREFACE

probably find that all of them have some application, and that in fact they
are interrelated. By getting an overview of the entre subject you will best
be able to evaluate your own past actons ad gain a greater degree of con­
trol over your immediate affairs. A thorough reading of the book will in­
spire thinking and reevaluation long afer you finish it.
The book has also been designed for browsing and for examining the
law that seems at that patcular moment most pertnent to you. Say you
are experiencing problems with a superior and cannot understand why
YOU efforts have not lead to more grattude or a promoton. Several laws
specifically address the master-underling relatonship, and you are amost
certinly transgressing one of them. By browsing the initial paragraphs for
te 48 laws in te table of contents, you can identif the pertinent law.
Finally, the book ca be browsed through and piced apart for enter­
tanment, for an enjoyable ride through the foibles ad great deeds of our
predecessors in power. A waing, however, to those who use the book for
this purpose: It might be better to tur back. Power is endlessly seductive
ad deceptive in its own way. It is a labyrinth-your mind becomes con­
sumed with solving its infinite problems, and you soon realize how pleas­
antly lost you have become. In other words, it becomes most ausing by
taking it seriously. Do not be frivolous with such a critcal matter. The gods
of power fown on the fivolous; they give ultimate satisfaction only to
those who study and reflect, and punish those who skim the surfaces look­
ing for a good tme.
Any man who tries to be good alt the time is bound to come to ruin
among thegeat number who are not good. Hence a prince who want
to keep his authorit must lam how not to be good, and use that
knowlede, or reainfom usin it, a necessit requires.
THE PRINCE, Niccolo Machiavelli, 7469-7527
PREFACE       xxiii

LAW
1
NEVER OUTSHINE
THE MASTER
JUDGMENT
Always make those above you feel comfortably superor
In your desire to please and impress them, do not go too
far in displaying your talents or you might accomplish
the oposite-inspire fear and insecurty.  Make your
masters appear more brlliant than the are and you will
attain the heights of powe
1

TRANSGRESSION OFTHE LAW
Nicolas Fouquet, Louis XIV's finance minister in the first years of his reign,
was a generous man who loved lavish parties, pretty women, and poetry.
He also loved money, for he led a extravagant lifestyle. Fouquet was
clever and very muc indispensable to the king, so when the prime minis­
ter, Jules Mazarin, died, in                                                     1661, the finance minister expected to be
named the successor. Instead, the king decided to abolish the position. This
and other signs made Fouquet suspect that he was falling out of favor, ad
so he decided to ingratate hirself with the king by staging the most spec­
tacular part the world had ever seen. The party's ostensible purpose
would be to commemorate the completion of Fouquet's chateau, Vaux-Ie­
Vicomte, but its real fnction was to pay tribute to the king, the guest of
honor.
The most brilliant nobility of Europe and some of the greatest minds
of the  time-La Fontaine, La Rochefoucauld, Madame de Sevigne­
attended the party. Moliere wrote a play for the occasion, in which he
hself was to perform at the evening's conclusion. The party began with a
lavish seven-course dinner, featuring foods from the Orient never be­
fore tasted in France, as weH as new dishes created especiaHy for the night.
The meal was accompanied with music commissioned by Fouquet to
honor the king.
Mter dinner there was a promenade through the chateau's gardens.
The grounds ad fountains of Vaux-Ie-Vicomte were to be the inspiraton
for VersaiHes.
Fouquet personally accompaied the young king through the geomet­
rically aligned arrangements of shrubbery ad flower beds. Arrlving at the
gardens' caals, they witnessed a fireworks display, which was followed by
the performance of Moliere's play. The party ra weH into the night and
everyone agreed it was the most amazing affair they had ever attended.
The next day, Fouquet was arrested by the king's head musketeer,
D'Artagnan. Three months later he went on trial for stealing fom the
country's teasury. (Actually, most of the stealing he was accused of he had
done on the king's behalf and with the king's permission.) Fouquet was
found guilty and sent to the most isolated prison in France, high in the
Pyrenees Mountains, where he spent the last twenty years of his life in soli­
tary confinement.
Interpretation
Louis XN, the Sun King, was a proud and arrogant man who wanted to be
the center of attention at all times; he could not countenance being out­
done in lavishness by anyone, and certainly not his finance minister. To
succeed Fouquet, Louis chose Jean-Baptiste Colbert, a man famous for his
parsimony ad for giving the duHest parties in Paris. Colbert made sure
that any money liberated from the teasury went staght into Louis's
hands. With the money, Louis built a palace even more magnificent than
Fouquet's-the glorious palace of Versailles. He used the same architects,
2                                                                                LAW 1

decorators, and garden designer. And at Versailles, Louis hosted partes
even more extravagant than the one tat cost Fouquet his feedom.
Let us examine the situaton. The evening of the party, as Fouquet pre­
sented spectacle on spectacle to Louis, eac more magnificent than the one
before, he imagined the affair as demonstatng his loyalty and devoton to
the king . Not only did he think the party would put hir back in the king's
favor, he thought it would show his good taste, his connectons, and his
popularity, making hir indispensable to the king ad demonstratng tat
he would make an excellent prime minister. Instead, however, each new
spectacle, each appreciative smile bestowed by the guests on Fouquet,
made it seem to Louis that his own friends and subjects were more
charmed by the finace minister than by te king hirself, ad that Fouquet
was actually flaunting his wealth and power. Rather than flattering Louis
XIV, Fouquet's elaborate party offended the king's vanity. Louis would not
admit this to anyone, of courseinstead, he found a convenient excuse to
rd hirself of a man who had inadvertently made hir feel insecure.
Such is the fate, in some form or other, of al those who unbalance te
master's sense of self, poke holes in his vanity, or make hir doubt his pre­
eminence.
Wen the evening began, Fouquet was at the top 0/ the world.
By the time it had ended, he was at the bottom.
Voltaire, 1 6 94-1 7 78
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the early                                                                   1600s, te ltalian astonomer and mathematician Galileo
found hirself in a precarious positon. He depended on the generosity of
great rulers to support his research, ad so, like all Renaissance scientsts,
he would sometmes make gifs of his inventons ad discoveries to the
leading patrons of te tme. Once, for instace, he presented a military
compass he had invented to the Duke of Gonzaga. Then he dedicated a
book explaning the use of the compass to te Medicis. Bot rulers were
gatefl, and through them Galileo wa able to find more students to teach.
No matter how great the discovery, however, his patons usually paid hir
wit gifts, not cash. This made for a life of constant insecurity and depen­
dence. There must be an easier way, he thought.
Galileo hit on a new stategy in 1610, when he discovered the moons
of Jupiter. Instead of dividing the discovery among his patonsgiving
one te telescope he had used, dedicatng a book to another, and so on-as
he had done in the past, he decided to focus exclusively on the Medicis. He
cose the Medicis for one reaon: Shortly aer Cosimo I had established
te Medici dynasty, in 1540, he had made Jupiter, the mightest of the
gods, te Medici symbol-a symbol of a power that went beyond politics
ad banking, one linked to ancient Rome ad its divinites.
Gaileo tumed his discovery of Jupiter's moons into a cosmic event
LAW 1                                                                          3

honoring the Medicis' greatness. Shortly afer the discovery, he announced
that "the bright stas [the moons ofJupiterl offered themselves in the heav­
ens" to his telescope at the same time as Cosimo II's enthronement. He
said that the number of the moonsfour-harmonized with the number of
the Medicis (Cosimo 11   had three brothers) and that the moons orbited
Jupiter as these four sons revolved around Cosimo I, the dynasty's founder.
More than coincidence, this showed that the heavens themselves reflected
the ascendancy of the Medici family. After he dedicated the discovery to
the Medicis, Gaileo commissioned an emblem representing Jupiter sitting
on a cloud with the four stars circling about hir, and presented this to
Cosimo 11  as a symbol of his link to the stars.
In 1610 Cosimo 11   made Galileo his official court philosopher and
mathematician, with a full salary. For a scientist this was the coup of a life­
tme. The days of begging for patonage were over.
Interpretation
In one stoke, Galileo gained more with his new strategy than he had in
years of begging. The reason is simple: All masters want to appear more
brilliant than other people.
They do not care about science or empirica truth or the latest inven­
tion; they care about their name and their glory. Galileo gave the Medicis
infinitely more glory by linking their name with cosmic forces than he had
by making them the patons of some new scientific gadget or discovery.
Scientists are not spared the vagaries of court life and patronage. They
too must serve masters who hold the purse strings. And their great intellec­
tual powers can make the master feel insecure, as if he were only there to
supply the fnds-a ugly, ignoble job. The producer of a great work
wants to feel he is more than just the provider of the financing. He wants to
appear creatve and powerfl, and also more importat tha the work pro­
duced in his name. Instead of insecurity you must give hir glory. Galileo
did not challenge the intellectu   authority of the Medicis with his discov­
ery, or make them feel inferior in any way; by literally aligning them with
the stars, he made them shine brilliantly among the courts of Italy. He did
not outshine te master, he made the master outshine all others.
KEYS TO POWER
Everyone has insecurities. W hen you show yourself in the world and dis­
play your talents, you naturaly stir up all kinds of resentent, envy, and
other manifestatons of insecurity. This is to be expected. You cannot spend
your life worrying about the petty feelings of others . With those above you,
however, you must take a different approach: W hen it comes to power,
outshining the master is perhaps the worst mistake of all.
Do not fool yourself into thinking that life has changed much since the
days of Louis XIV and the Medicis. Those who attain hig standing in life
are like kings and queens: They want to feel secure in their positions, and
4                                                                                 LAW 1

superior to those around them in intelligence, wit, and carm. It is a deadly
but common mispercepton to believe that by displaying and vaunting
YOUf gifts and talents, you are winning the master's affecton. He may feign
appreciation, but at his first opportunity he will replace you with someone
less intelligent, less attractive, less threatening, just as Louis XV replaced
the sparkling Fouquet with the bland Colbert. And as with Louis, he will
not admit te truth, but will find an excuse to rid hirself of YOUf presence.
This Law involves two rules that you must realize. First, you can inad­
vertently outshine a master simply by being YOUfself. There are masters
who are more insecure than others, monstously insecUfe; you may natu­
rally outshine them by YOUf charm and grace.
No one had more natura talents than Astorre Manfredi, prince of
Faenza. The most handsome of all the young princes of Italy, he captivated
his subjects with his generosity and open spirit.
In the year 1500, Cesare Borgia laid siege to Faenza. W hen the city
surrendered, the citizens expected the worst from the cruel Borgia, who,
however, decided to spare the town: He simply occupied its fortress, exe­
cuted none of its citizens, and allowed Pince Mafredi, eighteen at the
time, to remain with his court, in complete freedom.
A few weeks later, though, soldiers hauled Astorre Manfredi away to a
Roman prison. A year after that, his body wa fished out of the River
Tiber, a stone tied around his neck. Borgia justfied the horrible deed with
some sort of trumped-up charge of treason and conspiracy, but the real
problem was that he was notoriously vain ad insecure. The young man
was outshining hir without even trying. Given Manfredi's natural talents,
the prince's mere presence made Borgia seem less attractive and caris­
matic. The lesson is simple: If you cannot help being charming and supe­
rior, you must leam to avoid such monsters of vanity. Either that, or find a
way to mute your good qualites when in the company of a Cesare Borgia.
Second, never imagine that because the master loves you, you can do
anything you want . Entire books could be written about favorites who fell
out of favor by taking their status for granted, for daring to outshine. In
late-sixteenth-century Japan, the favorite of Emperor Hideyoshi was a man
called Sen no Rikyu. The premier artist of the tea ceremony, which had be­
come an obsession with the nobility, he was one of Hideyoshi's most
trusted advisers, had his own apartment in the palace, and was honored
throughout Japan. Yet in 1591, Hideyoshi had hir arrested and sentenced
to death. Rikyu took his own life, instead. The cause for his sudden change
of fortune was discovered later: It seems that Rikyu, former peasant and
later court favorite, had had a wooden statue made of hirself wearing san­
dals (a sign of nobility) ad posing loftily. He had had this statue placed in
the most important temple inside the palace gates, in clear sight of the roy­
alty who ofen would pass by. To   Hideyoshi this signified that Rikyu had
no sense of limits. Presuming that he had the same rights as those of the
highest nobility, he had forgotten that his position depended on the em­
peror, and had come to believe that he had eaed it on his own. This was
LAW                                                                              1   5

an unforgivable miscaculaon of his own importance and he paid for it
with his life. Remember the following:  Never take your position for
granted and never let any favors you receive go to your head.
Knowing the dangers of outshining your master, you can tur this Law
to your advantage. First you must flatter and puff up your master. Overt
flattery can be effectve but ha its limits; it is too direct and obvious, and
looks bad to other courters. Discreet flattery is much more powerfl. If
you are more intelligent tha your master, for example, seem the opposite:
Make hir appear more intelligent tha you. Act naive. Make it seem that
you need his expertse. Commit harmless mistaes that will not hurt you in
the long run but will give you the cance to ak for his help. Masters adore
such requests. A master who cannot bestow on you the gifs of his experi­
ence may direct rancor ad ill will at you instead.
If your ideas are more creative than your master's, ascribe them to
hir, in as public a manner as possible. Make it clea that your advice is
merely an echo of hi advice.
If you surpass your master in wit, it is okay to play the role of the court
jester, but do not make hir appear cold and surly by compaison. Tone
down your humor if necessary, and find ways to make hir seem the dis­
penser of amusement and good cheer. If you are naturally more sociable
and generous tha your master, be carefl not to be the cloud that blocks
his radiance fom oters. He must appear as the sun around which every­
one revolves, radiatng power and brilliance, the center of attention. If you
are thrust into the position of entertaining hir, a display of your limited
meas may win you his sympathy. Any attempt to impress hir with your
grace and generosity can prove fatal: La fom Fouquet or pay the price.
In al of these cases it is not a weakness to disguise your stengths if
in the end they lead to power. By letting others outshine you, you remain
in control, instead of being a victm of their insecurity. This will all come in
hady the day you decide to rise above your inferior status. If, like Galileo,
you can make your master shine even more in the eyes of others, then you
are a godsend and you will be instantly promoted.
Image:
The Stars in the
Sky. There can be only
one sun at a time. Never
obscure  the  sunlight,  or
riyal the sun's brilliance;
rather, fade into the sky and
find ways to heighten
the master star's
intensity.
6                                                                                 LAW 1

Authority: Avoid outshining the master. All superiority is odious, but the
superiority of a subject over his prince is not only stupid, it is fatal. This is a
lesson that the stars in the sky teach us-they may be related to the sun,
and just as brilliant, but they never appear in her company.                          (Baltasar
Gracian, 1601-165R)
REVERSAL
You cannot worry about upsetting every person you core across, but you
must be selectvely cruel. If your superior is a falling star, there is nothing
to fear from outshining hir. Do not be mercifl-your master had no suc
scruples in his own cold-blooded climb to the top. Gauge his strength. If he
is weak, discreetly hasten his downfall: Outdo, outcharm, outsrat hir at
key moments. If he is ver weak and ready to fall, let nature take its course.
Do not risk outshining a feeble superior-it right appear cruel or spitefl.
But if your master is fi                                                              r           in his positon, yet you know yourself to be the
more capable, bide your tme and be patent. It is the natural course of
things that power eventually fades and weakens. Your master will fall
someday, and if you play it right, you will outlive and soreday outshine
hir.
LAW 1                                                                                 7

LAW
2
NEVER PUT TOO MUCH
TRUST IN FRIENDS, LEARN
H OW TO USE ENEMIES
JUDGMENT
Be wary of friends-the wil betray you more quickly, for
the are easily aroused to envy. The also become spoild
and trnnical. But hire a former enemy and he will be
more loyal than a friend, because he has more to prve.
In fact, you have more to fearfom friends than fom en­
emies. Iyou have no enemies, jnd a way to make them.
8

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In the mid-ninth century A.D., a young man named Michael III assumed
To   have a good enemy,
the throne of the Byzantne Empire. His mother, the Empress Theodora,
choose a [riend: He
had been banished to a nunnery, and her lover, Theoctstus, had been mur­       knows where to strike.
dered; at the head of the conspiracy to depose Theodora and enthrone           DIANE DE POITIERS,
1 499-1566, MISTRESS OF
Michael had been Michael's unde, Bardas, a ma of intelligence and ambi­
HENRI II OF FRANCE
ton. Michael was now a young, inexperienced mIer, surrounded by in­
triguers,  murderers,  and profligates. In this tme of peril he needed
someone he could tust as his councillor, and his thoughts tumed to Basil­
ius, his best friend. Basilius had no experience whatsoever in govemment
and politics-in fact, he was the head of the royal stables-but he had
proven his love and gratitude tme ad again.
Every time I bestow a
They had met a few years before, when Michael had been visitng the
Wlcant office I make a
stables just as a wild horse got loose. Basilius, a young groom from peasant
hundred discontented
Macedonian stock, had saved Michael's life. The groom's stength ad             persons and one
courage had impressed Micael, who immediately raised Basilius fom the          ingrate.
obscurity of being a horse tainer to the positon of head of the stables. He    LOUIS XIV,  1 638-1715
loaded his friend with gifts and favors and they became insepaable. Basil­
ius was sent to the finest school in Byzantium, and the cmde peasant be­
cae a cultured and sophisticated courter.
Now Michael was emperor, and in need of someone loyal. Who could
he better trust with the post of chamberlain and chief councillor than a
young man who owed hir everything?                                             Thus tor m y  own part
Basilius could be tained for the job and Michael loved hir like a              I have more than once
been deceived by the
brother. Ignoring the advice of those who recommended the much more
person I loved most
qualified Bardas, Michael chose his fiend.
and o[  whose love,
Basilius leaed weIl ad was soon advising the emperor on al matters             above everyone else 's,
of state. The only problem seemed to be money-Basilius never had               I have been most c9nj­
dent. So that I b   leve
enough. Exposure to the splendor of Byzantne court life made hir avai­
that it   ay be   ght to
cious for the perks of power. Michael doubled, then tripled his salary, en­
love and s   ve one
nobled hir, and married hir off to his own mistress, Eudoxia Ingerina.         person above alt others,
Keeping such a tusted fiend and adviser satsfied was worth any price.          according to merit and
worth, but never to
But more trouble was to come. Bardas was now head of the army, ad
trust so much in this
Basilius convinced Michael that the man was hopelessly ambitous. Under
(empting trap o[[riend­
te illusion that he could control his nephew, Bardas had conspired to put      ship as to have cause to
hir on the throne, ad he could conspire agan, this time to get rid of          repent o[ it later on.
Michael and  assure the crown hirself.  Basilius poured poison into            BALDASSARE
CASTlGLlONE,
Michael's ear until the emperor agreed to have his unde murdered. During       1478-1529
a geat horse race, Basilius dosed in on Bardas in the crowd and stabbed
hir to death. Soon after, Basilius asked that he replace Bardas as head of
te army, where he could keep contol of the realm and quell rebellion.
This was granted.
Now Basilius's power and wealth only grew, and a few years later
Micael, in finacial staits from his own extavagance, asked hir to pay
back some of the money he had borrowed over the years . To   Michael's
shock and astonishment, Basilius refsed, with a look of such impudence
LAW 2                                                                          9

1'1 11,:
S\ \"1':  TI 11·.
FAH lFll. .\\Il TI IF
IIEIW\
that the emperor suddenly  realized  his predicament: The  former  stable
A   snake  chased  hy
boy had more money, more allies in the army and senate, and in the end
hunters asked a farmer
to save its life. To   hide it                                                 more power than the emperor hirself. A few weeks later, afer a night of
from  its  pursuer.\;  the                                                     heavy drinking,  Michael awoke to  find hirself sUITounded by soldiers.
farmer squatted and let
Basilius watched as they stabbed the emperor to death. Then, after pro­
the snake crawl into his
belly.   But   when   the                                                      claiming hirself emperor, he rode his horse throug the streets of Byzan­
danger had passed and
tum, brandishing the head of his former benefactor and best friend at the
the farmer asked the
snake to come out, the                                                         end of a lang pike.
snake refused.  [t was
warm and safe  inside.
Interpretation
On his way home, the
man saw a heron and                                                            Michael III staked his fture on the sense of gratitude he thought Basilius
went up  to  him  and                                                          must feel for hir . Surely Basilius would serve hir best; he owed the em­
whispered  what had
peror his weath, his education, and his positon. Then, once Basilius was in
happened.  The heron
told him to squat and                                                          power, anything he needed it was best to give to hir, strengthening the
strain  to   eject  the
bonds between te two men. It was only on the fatefl day when the em­
snake. When the snake
peror saw that impudent smile on Basilius's face that he realized his deadly
snuck its head out, the
heran caught it, ptlled it                                                     mistake.
out,  ami  killed  it.  The
                                                                               He had created a monster.  He had allowed a man to see power  up
farmer was worried that
the snake 's  poison                                                           close-a man who then wanted more, who asked for anything and got it,
miglt  still  be  inside                                                       who feit encumbered by the charity he had received and simply did what
him,  and  the  Ieum
many people da in such a situation: They forget the favors they have re­
told him that the cure
for snake poison was                                                           ceived and imagine they have eamed their success by their own merits .
to  cook ami eat six
At Michael's moment of realization, he could still have saved his own
white fowl.  " You 're
life, but friendship and love blind every man to their interests. Nobody be­
a   white   fo w l , "
said  tll e  farmer.                                                           lieves a fiend can betray. And Michael went on disbelieving until the day
" You 'll  do  for  a
his head ended up on a pike .
start. "   He   grabbed
the leron, put it in a
bag,  ami carried  it                                                          Lord, prtect me from my friends; I can take care of my enemies.
home,  where he
Valtaire, 1 6 94-1 778
hung it up while he
told his  wife  what
had  happened.
"['m surprised at
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
you, " said the wife.
" Th e   hird  does                                                            For several centuries aer te fall of the Han Dynasty (A.D. 222), Chinese his­
you  a  kindness,
tory followed the same patter of violent and bloody coups, one aer the
rids you ofthe evil
in   y o u r  h e Uy,                                                          other. Army men would plot to k a wea emperor, then would replace hir
saves your life  in                                                            on the Dragon Throne with a stong general. The general would start a new
fact,   yet  you
                                                                               dynasty ad crown hirself emperor; to ensure his own survival he would kill
catch it and talk
of  killing   it. "                                                            off his fellow generals. A few years later, however, te patter would resume:
She  immedi­                                                                   New generals would rise up and assassinate hir or his sons in teir tur. To
ately released
be emperor of China was to    be alone, sUITounded by a pack of enemies-it
the heron, and
it flew away.                                                                  was the least powerfl, least secure positon in the realm.
B u t   on  its
In A.D. 959, General  Chao K'uang-yin  became  E mperor Sung.  He
way, it gouged
knew the odds, the probability that within a year or to he would be mur­
out her eyes.
Mo ra I :                                                                      dered; how could he  break the patter?  Soon after becoming emperor,
When   you                                                                     Sung ordered a banquet to celebrate the new dynasty, and invited the most
see   water
powerfl commaders in the army.                                                 M                                                                               ter they had drunk much wine, he
flowing
uphill, it
means that
someone is repaying a kindnes.1
AFRICA N FOLK TA /I

dismissed te guards and everybody else except the generals, who now
feared he would murder them in one fell swoop. Instead, he addressed
There are many who
them: "The whole day is spent i fear, and I am unhappy both at the table
think therefore that a
ad in my bed. For which one of you does not dream of ascending the                wise prince ollght,
throne? I do not doubt your allegiace, but if by some chance your subor­          when he has the
chance, to foment
dinates, seeking wealth and positon, were to force te emperor's yellow
astl/tely same enmity,
robe upon you in tur, how could you refse it?" Drunk and fearing for
so that hy suppressillg
their lives, the generals proclaimed their innocence and their loyalty. But       it he will augment his
Sung had other ideas: "The best way to pass one's days is in peacefl en­          greatness. Princes, and
especially new ones,
joyment of riches and honor. If you are willing to give up your commands,
have fOllnd more fäith
I am ready to provide you with fine estates and beautfl dwellings where
and more usefulness in
you may tae your pleasure with singers ad girls as your companions."              those men, whom at the
heginning oftheir
The astonished generals reaized that instead of a life of anxiety and
power they regarded
struggle Sung was offering them riches and securit. The next day, all of
with slIspidon, than in
the generas tendered their resignatons, ad they retred as nobles to the           those they at first
estates that Sung bestowed on them.                                               con{ded in. Pandolfo
Petrl/cd, prince of
In one stroke, Sung                                                               ted a pack of "friendly"  wolves, who would
Siena, governed his
likely have betrayed hir, into a group of docile lambs, far fom al power.
state more by those
Over the next few years Sung continued his campaign to secure his                 whom he suspected
rule. In A.D. 971, King Liu of the Souther Ha finaly surrendered to him           than by others.
afer years of rebellion. To   Liu's astonishment, Sung gave hir a rak in the      NICCOLÖ MACHIAVELLI,
1469-1 527
imperial court ad invited hir to the palace to seal their newfound friend­
ship with wine. As King Liu took the glass that Sung offered hir, he hesi­
tated, fearing it contained poison. "Your subject's crimes certainly merit
death," he cried out, "but I beg Your Majesty to spare your subject's life. In­
deed I dare not drink this wine." Emperor Sung laughed, took the glass
from Liu, ad swallowed it hirself. There was no poison. From then on
Liu became his    ost trusted and loyal friend.                                   A brahman, a great
expert in Veda WI10 has
At the time, China had splintered into many smaller kingdoms. When
hecome a great archer
Ch'ien Shu, the king of one of these, was defeated, Sung's ministers ad­
as weil, offers his
vised the emperor to lock this rebel up. They presented documents prov­           services to his good
ing that he was still conspiring to kill Sung. When Ch'ien Shu came to visit      friend, who is now the
king. The hrahmall
the emperor, however, instead of locking hir up, Sung honored hir. He
cries out when he sees
also gave hir a package, which he told te former king to open when he
the king, "Recognize
was halfay hore. Ch'ien Shu opened te bundle on his retur jou                     ey                                            me, your friend!" The
ad saw that it contained all the papers documenting his conspiracy. He re­                                                      king answers him with
contempl and then
alized that Sung knew of his murderous plans, yet had spaed hir nonethe­
explains: " Yes, we were
less. This generosity won hir over, and he too beca                               e one of Sung's most
frields hefore, hut ollr
loyal vassals.                                                                    friendship was hased
Oll what power we
had                                                                               I was friellds
Interpretation
Wilh YOll, good
A Chinese proverb compares fiends to te jaws and teeth of a dangerous
hrahman, hecause it
animal: If you are not carefl, you will find tem chewing you up. Emperor          served my p"rpose. No
Sung knew the jaws he was passing between when he assumed the throne:             pauper is friend to the
rich, no fool to (he
His "fiends" in the army would chew hir up like meat, and i he some­
wise, 110 ('oward to (he
how survived, his "friends" in te goverment would have hir for supper.
LAW 2                                                                             11

hrave. An old friend­                                                             Emperor Sung would have no tuck with "friends"-he bribed his fellow
who needs him? It is
generals with splendid estates and kept them far away. This was a much
two mell of equal
better way to emasculate them than killing them, which would only have
wealth and equal hirth
who (ontract friend­                                                                                                                                    led other generals to seek vengeance. AndSung would have nothing to do
ship and marriage, not                                                                                                                                  with "friendly" ministers. More often than not, they would end up drinking
a rich man and a
                                                                                                                                                        his famous cup of poisoned wine.
pauper                                                                            An old
friend-who needs                                                                                                                                        Instead of relying on friends, Sung used his enemies,  one afer the
                                                                                  him?                                                                  other, trasforming them into far more reliable subjects.                     W                                         hile a friend ex­
THE MAHABHARATA,                                                                                                                                        pects more and more favors, and seethes with jealousy, these former ene­
C. T H I R D  CENTlJRY H.C.
mies  expected nothing and got everything.  A man  suddenly  spared the
guillotine is a gratenIl ma indeed, and will go to the ends of the earth for
the  man who  has padoned hir. In time, these former enemies became
Sung's most trusted fiends.
AndSung was finally able to break the patter of coups, violence, ad
civil war-the Sung Dynasty ruled China for more tha three hundred
Pick up a heefram                                                                 years.
killdlless, and learn the
limitations of killdless.
In a speech Abraham Lincoln delivered at the height of the Civil War
SUFI PROVERB
he referred to the Southerners as fellow human beings who were in
erroT. An elderly lady chastised him for not calling them irreconcilable
enemies who must be destroyed. "Wy, madam," Lincoln replied,
"do I not destroy my enemies when I make them my friends ?"
Men are more ready to                                                             KEYS TOPO                                                             W                                                                            E R
repay an illjury thal a
It is natura to want to employ your friends when you find yourself in times
helefit, because grati-
of need. The world is a harsh place, and your friends soften the harshness.
lude is a burdell and
revellge a pleasure.                                                              Besides, you know them.                                               W                                                                            hy depend on a stranger when you have a
TAcrus, c. A.D. 55-120                                                            fiend at hand?
The problem is that you ofen do not know your friends as weIl as you
imagine. Friends  often  agree  on things  in  order to  avoid an argument.
They cover up their unpleasant qualites so as to not offend eac other.
They laugh extra hard at eac oter's jokes. Since honesty rarely stength­
ens fiendship, you may never know how a friend truly feels. Friends will
say  that  they  love  your  poety,  adore  your  music,  envy  your  taste  in
clothes-maybe they mean it, often they do not.
When you decide to hire a fiend, you gradually discover the qualities
he or she has kept hidden. Stragely enough, it is your act of kindness that
unbalances everything.  People want to  feel they  des erve  their good for­
tune.  The receipt of a favor can become oppressive : It means you  have
been chosen because you are a friend, not necessarily because you are de­
serving.  There is  almost  a touc  of  condescension  in  the  act of hiring
friends that secretly aflicts tem. The injury will come out slowly: A little
more honesty, flashes of resentment and envy here and there, and before
you know it your friendship fades. The more favors and gifs you supply to
revive the friendship, the less gratitude you receive.
Ingratitude has a long and deep history. It has demonstated its powers
12                                                                                LAW 2

for so many centuries, that it is tuly amazing that people contnue to un­
derestimate them. Better to be way. If you never expect grattude fom a
PHOFITI\C ß)  Ol  J{
friend, you will be pleasantly surprised when they do prove gratefl.
1-: \ 1-:\ 1 1 1-:,
The problem with using or hiring friends is that it will inevitably limit
King Riero chanced
your power. The friend is rarely the one who is most able to help you; ad
llpon a time, speaking
in the end, skill and competence are far more importat than friendly feel­      with one of his
ings. (Michael III had a man right under his no se who would have steered       enemies, to be 10M in a
reproachful manner
hir right and kept hir alive: That man was Bardas.)
that he had stinking
A working situatons require a kind of distance between people. You
brealh. Whereupon Ihe
are trying to work, not make friends; friendliness (real or false) only ob­     good king, being some­
scures that fact. The key to power, then, is the ability to judge who is best   what dismayed in
hirnself as soon as he
able to further your interests in all situations. Keep friends for fiendship,
retumed hore chided
but work with te skilIed and competent.
his wife, "Row does it
Your enemies, on the other hand, are an untapped gold mine that you             happen thai you never
toM me of lhis prob­
must lear to exploit. When Talleyrand, Napoleon's foreign minister, de­
ler ? "  The wonzan,
cided in 1807 that his boss was leading France to ruin, and the time had
being a simple, cha,le.
come to tur against hir, he understood the dangers of conspiring against        and harmless dame,
the emperor; he needed a partner, a confederate-what friend could he            said, "Sir, I had tholghl
trust in such a project? He cose Joseph Fouche, head of the secret police,      all men '0 breath had
smelled so. " Thus it is
his most hated enemy, a man who had even tried to have hir assassinated.
plain that faults thai
He knew that their former hated would create an opportunity for an emo­         are evident 10 the
tonal reconciliation. He knew that Fouche would expect nothing from             senses, gross and
corporal, or otherwise
hir, and in fact would work to prove that he was worty of Talleyrad's
noforiolls to the world,
choice; a person who has something to prove will move mountains for you.
we know by our
Finally, he knew that his relationship with Fouche would be based on mu­        enenzies saoner than
tual self-interest, ad would not be contaminated by personal feeling. The       by our friends and
familiars.
selection proved perfect; although the conspirators did not succeed in top­
PLUTARCII,
pling Napoleon, the union of such powerl but unlikely partners gener­
c. A.n. 46-120
ated much interest in the cause; opposition to the emperor slowly began to
spread. And from then on, Talleyrand and Fouche had a fruitfl working
relationship. Whenever you can, bury the hatchet with an enemy, and
mae a point of puttng hir in your service.
As Lincoln said, you destoy an enemy when you mae a friend of
hir. In 1971, during the Vietnam War, Henry Kissinger was the target of
an unsuccessful kidnapping attempt, a conspiracy involving, among oters,
the renowned antwar activist priests the Berrigan brothers, four more
Catholic priests, and four nuns. In private, without informing the Scret
Service or the Justice Department, Kissinger aranged a Saturday-moring
meeting with three of the alleged kidnappers. Explaining to his guests that
he would have most American soldiers out of Vietnam by mid-1972, he
completely charmed them. They gave hir some "Kidnap Kissinger" but­
tons and one of them remained a friend of his for yeas, visiting hir on
several occasions. This was not just a onetime ploy: Kissinger made a pol­
icy of working with those who disagreed with hir. Colleagues commented
that he seemed to get along better with his enemies than with his friends.
Without enemies aound us, we grow lazy. An enemy at our heels
sharpens our wits, keeping us focused and alert. It is sometmes better,
LAW 2                                                                           13

then, to use enemies as enemies rather than trasforming them into fiends
or allies.
Mao Tse-tung saw conflict as key in his approach to power. In 1937 the
Japaese invaded China, interruptng the civil wa between Mao's Com­
munists and teir enemy, the Natonalists.
Fearing  that  te Japaese would wipe them out, some Communist
leaders advocated leaving the Nationalists to fight theJapanese, ad using
te tme to recuperate. Mao disagreed: The Japaese could not possibly
defeat and occupy a vast country like China for long. Once tey lef, the
Communists would have grown rusty if they had been out of combat for
several years, and would be i prepared to reopen their struggle with the
Nationasts. To    fight a formidable foe like theJapanese, in fact, would be
the  perfect traning for  the Communists' ragtag army.  Mao's  plan  was
adopted, and it worked: By the tme the Japanese finally reteated, te
Communists had gained the fighting experience tat helped them defeat
the Natonalists.
Years later, a Japanese visitor tried to apologize to Mao for his coun­
try's  invasion  of China.  Mao  interrupted,  "Should I  not  thank you  in­
stead?" Without a worthy opponent, he explained, a man or group cannot
grow stronger.
Mao's strategy of constant conflict has several key components. First,
be certan that in the long run you will emerge victorious. Never pick a
fight with someone you are not sure you ca defeat, as Mao knew the
Japanese would be defeated in time. Second, if you have no apparent ene­
mies, you must sometimes set up a convenient target, even tuming a friend
into an enemy. Mao used tis tactic tme and agan in politics. Third, use
such enemies to define your cause more clearly to the public, even faming
it as a struggle of good against evil. Mao actually encouraged China's dis­
agreements with the Soviet U nion and te United States; without clear-cut
enemies, he believed, his people would lose any sense of what Chinese
Communism meant. A sharply defined enemy is a fa stronger argument
for your side tha all the words you could possibly put togeter.
Never let the presence of enemies upset or distress you-you are far
better off with a declared opponent or two than not knowing where your
real enemies lie. The man of power welcomes conflict, using enemies to
enhance his reputaton as a surefooted fighter who ca be relied upon in
tmes of uncertainty.
14                                                                              LAW 2

Image: The Jaws of Ingratitude.                                                   Authority :
Knowing what would happen                                                         Know how to use
if you put a finger In                                                            enemies for your own
the mouth o f  a !ion,                                                            profit. You must learn to grab a
you would stay                                                                    sword not by its blade, which would
clear of it.                                                                      cut you, but by the handle, which allows
With friends                                                                      you to defend YOUfself. The wise man
you  will h ave                                                                   profits more from his enemies,
no such caution, and                                                              than a fool from his friends.
if you hire them, they will                                                       (Baltasar Gracian,
eat you alive with ingratitude.                                                   1601 - 1658)
REVERSAL
Although it is generally best not to mix work with friendship, there ae
tmes when a friend ca be used to greater effect than an enemy. A man of
power, for example, often has dirty work that has to be done, but for the
sae of appeaances it is generally preferable to have other people do it for
h                                                                                 ; fiends ofen do this the best, since their affecton for hir makes them
willing to tae chances. Also, if YOUf plans go awry for some reason, you
ca use a fiend as a convenient scapegoat. This "fall of the favorite" was a
tck ofen used by kings and sovereigns: They would let their dosest friend
a court take the fall for a mistake, since the public would not believe that
they would deliberately sacrifice a fiend for such a purpose. Of course,
aer you play that card, you have lost your friend forever. It is best, then, to
resere te scapegoat role for someone who is dose to you but not too
elose.
Finaly, the problem about working with friends is that it confses the
boundaies and distances that working requires. But if both parters in the
aagement understand the dangers involved, a friend often can be em­
ployed to great effect. You must never let YOUf guard down in suc a ven­
tre, however; always be on the lookout for any signs of emotional
dsturbace such as envy and ingrattude. Nothing is stable in the realm of
power, ad even the dosest of friends can be tansformed into the worst of
enemies.
LAW 2                                                                             15

LAW
3
CONCEAL YOUR
INTENTI ONS
JUDGMENT
Keep peol oJbalance and in the dark b never reveal­
ing the purpose behind your actions. I the have no clue
what you are up to, the cannot prepare a defense. Guide
them far enough down the wrng path, envelop them in
enough smoke, and by the time the realize your inten­
tions, it will be too late.
16

PART I :  U S E  DE C OYED O BJ E CTS OF D E S I RE AND RED
HERRINGS TO THROW PEOPLE OFF THE SCENT
Iat any point in the decetion you prcticepeol have the slightest suspi­
cion a to your intentions, alt is lost. Do not gve them the chance to sense
what you are up to: Throw them off  the scent b drgng red herngs
across the path. Use false sincerit, send ambigous sigals, set up mis­
lading objects of desire. Unabl to distinguish the genuineJom the false,
the cannot pick out your real goal.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Over several weeks,  Ninon de  Lenclos,  the most infamous courtesan of
seventeenth-century France, listened patently as the Marquis de Svigne
explained his stuggles in pursuing a heautifl hut difficult young countess.
Ninon was sixty-two at the tme, and more than experienced in matters of
love; the maquis was a lad of twenty-two, handsome, dashing, hut hope­
lessly inexperienced in romance. At first Ninon was amused to hear the
marquis                                                                         t    ahout his mistakes, hut fnally she had had enough. Unahle to
hear ineptitude in any realm, least of al in seducing a woman, she decided
to take the young man under her wing. First, hE ha to understand that this
was war, and that the heautifl countess was a Citadel to which he had to
lay siege as careflly as any general. Every step had to he planned and exe­
cuted with the utmost attention to detail ad nuace.
Instuctng the marquis to start over, Ninon told him to approach the
countess with a hit of distance, an air of nonchalance. The next tme the
two were alone together,  she said,  he would confide in the countess as
would a friend hut nota potential lover. This was to throw her off the scent.
The countess was no longer to take his interest in her for grated-perhaps
he was only interested in fiendship.
Ninon planned ahead. Once the countess wa confsed, it would he
time to make her jealous. At te next encounter, at a major fete in Paris, the
marquis would show up with a heautifl young woma at his side. This
heautfl young woman had equally heautfl friends, so that wherever the
countess would now see the marquis, he would he surrounded hy the most
stunning young women in Paris. Not only would the countess he seething
with jealousy, she would come to see the marquis as someone who was de­
sired hy others. It was hard far Ninon to make the marquis understand, hut
she patently explained that a woman who is interested in a man wants to
see that other women ae interested in him, to  . Not only does that give
him instat value, it makes it all the more satsfing to snatch him fom
their clutches.
Once the countess was jealous hut intrigued, it would he tme to he­
guile her. On Ninon's instuctions, the marquis would fail to show up at a­
fairs where the countess expected to see him. Then, suddenly, he would
appear at salons he had never fequented hefore, hut that the countess at-
LAW 3                                                                           17

tended ofen. She would be unable to predict his moves. All of this would
push her into the state of emotona confsion that is a prerequisite for suc­
cessfl seduction.
These moves were executed,  and took several weeks. Ninon moni­
tored the marquis's progress: Through her network of spies, she heard how
te  countess  would  laugh  a litde  harder at  his  wittcisms,  listen  more
closely to his stories . She heard that te countess was suddenly asking ques­
tons about hir. Her friends told her that at social affairs te  countess
would ofen look up at the marquis, following his steps. Ninon feJt certain
that the young woman was faling under his spell. It was a matter of weeks
now, maybe a month or two, but if all went smoothly, the citadel would
fall.
A few days later the marquis was at the countess's hore. They were
alone. Suddenly he was a different man: This time actng on his own im­
pulse, rather than following Ninon's instructons, he took the countess's
hands and told her he was in love with her. The young woman seemed
confsed, a reaction he did not expect. She became polite, then excused
herself. For the rest of the evening she avoided his eyes, was not there to
say good-night to hir. The next few times he visited he was told she was
not at hore. When she finally admitted hir again, the two feIt awkward
and uncomfortable with each other. The spell was broken.
Interpretation
Ninon de Lenclos knew everything about the art of love. The greatest writ­
ers, thinkers, and politicians of the time had been her lovers                        men like La
Rochefoucauld, Moliere, and Richelieu. Seduction was a game to her, to be
practced with skill. As she got older, and her reputaton grew, the most im­
portant families in France would send their sons to her to be instructed in
matters of love.
Ninon  knew that  men and women are very  different,  but when it
comes to seduction they feel the same: Deep down inside, they often sense
when they are being seduced, but they give in because they enjoy the feel­
ing of being led along. It is a pleasure to let go, and to allow the other per­
son   to   detour   you   into   a  strange   country.   Everyting   in   seducton,
however, depends on suggestion. You cannot announce yOUf intentions or
revea them direcdy in words. Instead you must throw your targets off the
scent. To   surrender to YOUf guidance they must be appropriately confsed.
You have to scramble your signals-appear interested in another man or
woman (the decoy), ten hint at being interested in the target, then feign
indifference, on and on. Such patters not only confse, they excite.
Imagine this story from the countess's perspectve: After a few of the
marquis's moves, she sensed the marquis was playing some sort of game,
but the game delighted her. She did not know where he was leading her,
but so much the better. His moves intigued her, each of them keeping her
waiting for the next one-she even enjoyed her jealousy and confsion, for
sometimes any emotion is better tha the boredom of security. Perhaps the
marquis had uIterior motves; most men do. But she was willing to wat and
18                                                                                    LAW 3

see, and probably if she had been made to wait long enough, what he was
up to would not have mattered.
The moment the maquis uttered that fatal word "love," however, all
was changed. This was no longer a ga                                                    e wit moves, it was an artless show
of  passion.  His  intention  was  revealed:  He  wa  seducing  her.  This  put
everything he had done in a new light. All that before had been carming
now seemed ugly and conniving; the countess feit embarrassed and used.
A door closed that would never open again.
Do not be held a cheat, even though it is impossible to live today without being one.
Let your greatest cunning lie in coverng up what looks like cunning.
BaltaST Grarin.  1601-1658
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1850 the young Oto von Bismarck, then a thirty-five-year-old deput in
the Pussian parliament, was at a turing point in his caeer. The issues of
te  day  were  the unification of the  may  states  (including Pussia)  into
which Germany was then divided, and a wa against Austia, the powerfl
neighbor to the south tat hoped to keep te Germans weak ad at odds,
even treatening to intervene i they tied to unite. Pince Willia                         , next in
line to be Pussia's king, was in favor of going to wa, and te parliament
rallied to the cause, prepared to back any mobilizaton of troops. The only
ones to oppose war were the present king, Frederick William IV, and his
ministers, who preferred to appease the powerfl Austrias.
Throughout his career, Bismarck had been a loyal, even passionate
supporter of Prussian might and power. He dreamed of German unifica­
ton, of going to war against Austria and humiliating te country tat for so
long had kept Germay divided. A former soldier, he saw wafare as a glo­
rious business.
This, after all, was the  man who yeas later would say,  "The great
questons of the tme will be decided, not by speeches and resolutons, but
by iron ad blood."
Passionate patriot ad lover of militay glory, Bismarck neverteless
gave a speech in parliament at the height of the wa fever that astonished
all who heard it. "Woe unto te statesman," he said, "who makes wa wit­
out a reason that will still be vaid when the wa is over! Afer the war, you
w                                                                                       all look differently at these questons. Will you ten have the couage
to tur to te peasant contemplatng the ashes of his farm, to te ma who
has been crippled, to te father who has lost his cildren?" Not only did
Bismarck go on to talk of the madness of tis war, but, stagest of al, he
prased Austia and defended her actons. This went aganst ever                            g he
had stood for. The consequences were immediate. Bismarck was aganst
te war-what could tis possibly mea? Other deputes were confsed,
ad several of them changed their votes. Eventually te king and his minis­
ters won out, and war was averted.
A few weeks afer Bismarck's infamous speech, the king, gratefl that
LAW 3                                                                                   19

he had spoken for peace, made hir a cabinet minister. A few yeas later he
became the Prussian premier. In this role he eventuaIly led his country and
a peace-loving king into a war against Austria, crushing the former empire
and establishing a mighty German state, with Pussia at its head.
Interpretation
At the  tme of his  speech in  1850, Bismarck made several calculations.
First, he sensed that the Prussian military, which had not kept pace with
other European armies, was unready for war-that Austria, in fact, might
very weIl win, a disastous result for the fture. Second, if the war were lost
and Bismarck had supported it, his career would be gravely jeopardized.
The king and his conservative ministers wanted peace; Bismarck wanted
power. The answer was to throw people off the scent by supporting a cause
he  detested,  saying things he would laugh at if said by another. A whole
country was fooled. It was because of Bismarck's speech that the king made
hir a minister, a positon fom which he quickly rose to be prime minister,
attaining the  power to strengthen the  Pussian military and  accomplish
what he had wanted all along: the humiliation of Austia and the unifica­
tion of Germany under Prussia's leadership.
Bismarck was certainly one of the cleverest statesma who ever lived,
a master of strategy and decepton. No one suspected what he was up to in
this case. Had he announced his real intentions, arguing that it was better
to wait now and fight later, he would not have won the argument,  since
most Prussians wanted war at that moment and mistakenly believed that
their army was superior to the Austias. Had he played up to the king,
asking to be made a minister in exchange for supporting peace, he would
not have succeeded either: The king would have distrusted his ambition
and doubted his sincerity.
By being completely insincere  and sending misleading signals, how­
ever,  he deceived everyone, concealed his purpose, and attained  every­
thing he wanted. Such is the power of hiding your intentions.
KEYS TO POWER
Most people are open books. They say what they feel, blurt out their opin­
ions at every opportunity, and constatly reveal their plans and intentions.
They do this for several reasons. First, it is easy and natural to always want
to talk about one's feelings and plans for the fture. It takes effort to contol
your tongue and monitor what you reveal. Second, many believe that by
being honest and open they ae winning people's hearts and showing their
good nature.They are greatly deluded. Honesty is actually a blunt instru­
ment, which bloodies more than it cuts. Your honesty is likely to offend
people; it is much more prudent to tailor your words, telling people what
they want to hear rather than the coarse and ugly tuth of what you feel or
think. More important, by being unabashedly open you make yourself so
predictable and familiar that it is almost impossible to respect or fear you,
and power will not accrue to a person who cannot inspire such emotons.
20                                                                                LAW 3

If you yea for power, quickly lay honesty aside, and train yourself in
the art of concealing your intentions. Master the art and you will always
have the upper hand. Basic to an abilit to conceal one's intentons is a
simple truth about human nature: Our first instinct is to always tust ap­
pearaces. We   cannot go around doubtng the reality of what we see and
hear-constantly imagining that appearances concealed something else
would exhaust ad terrif uso This fact makes it relatvely easy to conceal
one's intentions. Simply dagle an object you seem to desire, a goal you
seem to aim for, in front of people's eyes and tey will take the appearance
for reait. Once teir eyes foeus on the decoy,                                   will fail to notce what
you ae really up to. In seducton, set up                                        such as desire
and indifference, and you not only throw them off the scent, you inflame
their desire to possess you .
A tactic that is often effectve in setting up a red herring is to appear to
support a idea or cause that is actually contay to your own sentments.
(Bismarck used this to great effect in his speec in 1850.) Most people will
believe you have experienced a chage of heart, since it is so unusual to
play so lightly with something as emotional as one's opinions and values.
The same applies for any decoyed object of desire: Sem to want some­
thing in which you are actually not at all interested and your enemies will
be throW off the scent, making al kinds of errors in their calculations .
During the War of the Spanish Succession in 171 1, the Duke of Marl­
borough, head of the English army, wated to destroy a key French fort,
because it proteeted a vital thoroughfare into Fraee. Yet he knew tat if he
destroyed it, the French would realize what he wated-to advance down
that road. Instead, then, he merely captured the fort, and garrisoned it with
some of his troops, making it appear as if he wanted it for some purpose of
his OW. The French attaeked the fort ad the duke let them reeapture it.
Once they had it back, though, the destroyed it, figuring that the duke had
wanted it for some important reason. Now that the fort was gone, the road
was unprotected, and Marlborough could easily march into France.
Use this tacte in the following manner: Hide your intentons not by
closing up (with the risk of appearing secretive, and maing people suspi­
cious) but by talking endlessly about your desires and goalsjust not yOUf
real ones. You will kill three birds with one stone: You appea fiendly,
open, ad tusting; you conceal YOUf intentons; and you send YOUf rivals
on time-consuming wild-goose ehases.
Anoter powerfl tool in throwing people off te scent is false sineer­
ity. People easily mistake sincerity for honest. Remember-their first in­
stnet is to trust appearances, and sinee they value honesty and want to
believe in the honesty of those around them, they will raely doubt you or
see through YOUf aet. Seeming to believe what you say gives your words
great weight. This is how Iago deceived and destoyed Othello: Given the
depth of his emotions, the apparent sincerity of his coneems about Desde­
mona's supposed infidelity, how eould Othello distrust hir? This is also
how the great con artst Yellow Kid Weil pulled the wool over suckers'
eyes: Seeming to believe so deeply in te deeoyed object he was dangling
LAW 3                                                                           21

in font of them (a phony stock, a touted racehorse), he made its reaity
hard to doubt. It is importat, of course, not to go too far in this area. Sin­
cerity is a ticky tool: Appear overpassionate and you raise suspicions. Be
measured and believable or your ruse                                             w                                                                             seem the put-on that it iso
To    make your false sincerity an effective weapon in concealing your
intentons, espouse a belief in honesty and forthrightness as important so­
cia values. Do this as publicly as possible. Emphasize your position on this
subject by occasionally divulging some heartelt thought-though only one
that is actually meaningless or irrelevant,  of course. Napoleon's minister
Talleyrad was a master at taking people into his confidence by revealing
some  apparent  secret.  This  feigned  confidence-a  decoy-would  then
elicit a real confidence on the other person's part.
r                                                                                Remember: The best deceivers do everyting they can to cloak their
roguish qualities. They cultvate an air of honesty in one area to disguise
I                                                                                their dishonesty in others. Honesty is merely aother decoy in their arsenal
)                                                                                of weapons.
J
22                                                                               LAW 3

PART I I :  U S E  S M O KE S C R E E N S  TO
DISGUISE YOUR ACTIONS
Decetion is always the best strteg, but the best deceptions require a screen
of smoke to distrct peopl 's attention fom your real purpose. The bland
exterior-like the unreadable poke face-is ofen the perfect smoke screen,
hiding your intentions behind the comfortabl and familiar. Iyou lad the
sucker down a familiar path, he won 't catch on when you lad him into a
trp.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
In 1910, a Mr. Sam Geezil of Chicago sold his warehouse business for close          .1 1" 1 1 1 r    " I " < :   OF  I S H A E I . .
H·: I C \ S  \ O H S I l I P  O i e
to $ 1  million. He settled down to semiretrement and the managing of his
Tl f l·: IDOL BA·A L
many properties, but deep inside he itched for the old days of deal-making.
Then fehu assembled
One day a young man namedJoseph Weil visited his office, wantng to buy
all the people, and said
a apartment he had up for sale. Geezil explained the terms : The price was
to them, "Ahab served
$8,000, but he  only required a down  payment  of $2,000. Weil  said he             Ba'al a fittle; but fehu
would sleep on it, but he came bac the following day and offered to pay             willserve hir much
more. Now therefore
the fll $8,000 in cash, if Geezil could wait a couple of days, untl a deal
call to me a/l th e
Weil was working on came through. Even in semiretirement, a clever busi­
prophets of Ba 'al, all
nessman like Geezil was curious as to how Weil would be able to come up             his worshippers and all
with so much cash (roughly $ 150,000 today) so quickly. Weil seemed reluc­          his priests; let none be
missing, for I have a
tant to say, ad quickly changed the subject, but Geezil was persistent. Fi­
greal sacrifice to oler
nally,  after  assurances  of confidentiality,  Weil  told  Geezil  the following
to Ba 'al; whoever is
story.                                                                              missing shall not live. "
Weil's  uncle  was  the  secretay  to  a  coterie  of multmillionaire  fi­          But fehu did it with
cunning in order t
nanciers.  These wealthy gentlemen  had  purchased  a  hunting  lodge  in
destroy the worship­
Michiga ten yeas ago, at a cheap price. They had not used the lodge for a
pers of Ba'al.
few years, so they had decided to seIl it and had asked Weil's uncle to get         And fehu ordered,
whatever he could for it. For reasons-good reasons-of his own, the uncle            "Sanctify   a solemn
assembly for Ba 'al. " So
had been nursing a grudge against the millionaires for years ; this was his
Ihey proclaimed it. And
chance to get back at them. He would seIl the property for $35,000 to a set­
.fehu sent throughout
up man (whom it was Weil's job to find) . The financiers were too wealthy to        all Israel; and all the
worry about this low price. The set-up ma would then tur around and                 worshippers ofBa'al
came, so thaI there was
seIl the propert again for its real price, around $ 155,000. The uncle, Weil,
not a man Icft who did
and the third man would split the profits from this second sale. It was all
not come. And they
legal and for a good cause                                                          the uncle's just retribution.                                                  entered the house of
                                                                                    Geezil had heard enough: He wanted to be the set-up buyer. Weil was            Ba 'al, and the house of
                                                                                                                                                                   Ba 'al was filled from
                                                                                    reluctat to involve hir, but Geezil would not back down: The idea of a
                                                                                                                                                                   one end to the other
                                                                                    large profit, plus a little adventure, had hir champing at the bit. Weil ex­   Then fehu went inlo
                                                                                    plained that Geezil would have to put up the $35,000 in cash to bring the      the house of Ba 'al . . .
                                                                                    deal off. Geezil, a millionaire, said he could get the money with a snap of    and he said to the
                                                                                                                                                                   worshippers of Ba 'al,
                                                                                    his fingers. Weil finally relented and agreed to arrange a meeting between
                                                                                                                                                                   "Search, and see
                                                                                    the uncle, Geezil, and the finaciers, in the town of Galesburg, Illinois.      that there is no servant
                                                                                    On the train ride to Galesburg, Geezil met the uncle-an impressive             ofthe LORD here
LAW 3                                                                               23

among you, but only                                                               man, with whom he avidly discussed business, Weil also brought along a
the worshippers of
companion,  a somewhat paunchy man named George Gross.  Weil  ex­
Ba'al. " Then he went in
plained to Geezil that he hirself was a boxing trainer, that Gross was one
to offer sacrifices and
burnt offerings.                                                                  of the promising prizefighters he trained, and that he had asked Gross to
Now Jehu had                                                                      come  along to  make  sure  the  fighter stayed  in  shape. For  a promising
stationed eighty men
fighter,  Gross was  unimpressive looking-he  had gray hair  and  a beer
outside, and said, "The
belly-but Geezil was so excited about the deal that he didn't really think
man who allows any of
those whom I give into                                                            ab out the man's flabby appearance.
your hands to escape                                                              Once in Galesburg, Weil and his uncle went to fetch the financiers
shall forfeit his life. " So
while Geezil waited in a hotel room with Gross, who promptly put on his
as soon as he had made
boxing trunks. As Geezil half watched, Gross began to shadowbox. Dis­
an end of offering the
burnt offering, Jehu                                                              tacted as he was, Geezil ignored how badly the boxer wheezed after a few
said to the guard and to                                                          minutes of exercise, although his style seemed real enough. A hour later,
the officers, "Go in and
                                                                                  Weil and his uncle reappeared with the financiers, an impressive, intimidat­
slay them; let not a man
escape. "                                                                         ing group of men, all wearing fancy suits. The meetng went well and the fi­
So when they put them                                                             naciers  agreed  to  sell  the  lodge  to  Geezil,  who  had  aready  had  the
to the sword, the guard
$35,000 wired to a local bank.
and the officers cast
This minor business now settled, the financiers sat back in their chairs
them out and went into
the inner room of the                                                             and began to banter about high finance, throwing out the name 'j. P. Mor­
house of Ba'al and they                                                           gan" as if they knew the man. Finally one of them notced the boxer in the
brought out the pillar
corer of the room. Weil explained what he was doing there. The financier
that was in the house of
countered tat he too had a boxer in his entourage, whom he named. Weil
Ba'al and burned it.
And they demolished                                                               laughed brazenly and exclaimed that his man could easily knock out their
the pillar of Ba 'al and                                                          man.  Conversaton  escalated into argument. In the heat of passion, Weil
demolished the house
callenged the men to a bet. The financiers eagerly agreed and lef to get
of Ba 'al, and made it a
teir ma ready for a fight the next day.
latrine to this day.
Thus Jehu wiped out                                                               As  soon as  they  had lef,  the uncle yelled at Weil,  right in  font  of
Ba'al from Israel.                                                                Geezil:  They  did not have enough money to  bet  with,  ad once the fi­
OLD TESTAMENT,                                                                    naciers discovered this, the uncle would be fired. Weil apologized for get­
2 KINGS 1 0 : 1 8-28
ting hir in this mess, but he had a plan: He knew the other boxer well, ad
with a little  bribe,  they  could f the  fight.  But where would the money
come from for the bet? the uncle replied. Without it they were as good as
dead. Finally Geezil had heard enough. Unwilling to jeopardize hi deal
with any ill will, he offered his own $35,000 cash for part of the bet. Even if
he lost that, he would wire for more money and still make a profit on the
sale  of the lodge. The uncle ad nephew thanked hir. With their own
$15,000 and Geezil's 1$35,000 they would manage to have enough for the
bet.  That evening,  as  Geezil watched te two boxers rehearse the f in
the hotel room, his mind reeled a te                                              kg he was going t make fom bot
the boxng match ad te sale of te lodge.
The fight took place in a gym the next day.  Weil  handled  the cash,
which  was placed for security in a locked box. Everything was pro­
ceeding as planned in the hotel room. The financiers were looking glum at
how badly their fighter was doing, and Geezil was dreaming about the easy
money he was  about to  make. Then, suddenly, a wild swing by the fi­
nancier's fighter hit Gross hard in the face, knocking hir down. When he
hit the canvas, blood spurted from his mouth. He coughed, then lay still.
24                                                                                LAW 3

One of the finaciers, a former doctor, checked his pulse; he was dead. The
millionaires panicked: Everyone had to get out before the police arrived­
SIE  K AC ROSS 'j'1 J f:
they could all be charged with murder.
0(:1\: L\ BHOAD
Terrified, Geezil hightailed it out of the gym ad bac to Chicago, leav­           DAYLCllT
ing behind his $35,000 which he was only too glad to forget, for it seemed
                                                                                  This means to create a
a small price to pay to avoid being implicated in a crime. He never wanted        front that eventually
to see Weil or any of the others again.                                           becomes imbued with
                                                                                  an atmosphere or
Afer Geezil scurried out, Gross stood up, under his own stea. The
                                                                                  impression offamiliar­
blood that had spurted from his mouth cae fom a ball filled with chicken          ity, within which the
blood and hot water that he had hidden in his cheek. The whole affar had          strategist may maneu­
been masterminded by Weil, better known as "the Yellow Kid," one of the           ver unseen while all
eyes are trained to see
most creative con artsts in history. Weil split the $35,000 with the fi­
obvious familiarities.
nanciers and the boxers (all fellow con artists)-a nice little profit for a few
"THE THIRTY-SIX
days' work.                                                                       STRATEGIES," QUOTED I
THE JAPANESE ART OF
WAR,
Interpretation                                                                    THOMAS CLEARY, 1991
The Yellow Kid had staked out Geezil as the perfect sucker long before he
set up the con. He knew the boxing-match scam would be the perfect ruse
to separate Geezil from his money quickly and definitvely. But he also
knew that if he had begun by trying to interest Geezil in the boxing match,
he would have failed miserably. He had to concea his intentions and
switch attenton, create a smoke screen-in this case the sale of the lodge.
On the tain ride and in the hotel room Geezil's mind had been com­
pletely occupied with the pending deal, the easy money, the cance to
hobnob wit wealthy men. He had failed to notce that Gross was out of
shape and middle-aged at best. Such is the distracting power of a smoke
screen. Engrossed in the business deal, Geezil's attenton was easily di­
verted to the boxing match, but only at a point when it was already too late
for hir to notice the details that would have given Gross away. The match,
aer a, now depended on a bribe rater than on the boxer's physical condi­
ton. And Geezl                                                                    w                        so distacted at the end by the illusion of the boxer's death
tat he completely forgot about h money.
Lea from the Yellow Kid: The familiar, inconspicuous font is the
perfect smoke screen. Approach your mark with an idea that seems ordi­
nary enough-a business deal, financial intrigue. The sucker's mind is dis­
tacted, his suspicions allayed. That is when you gently guide hir onto the
second path, the slippery slope down whic he slides helplessly into your
tap.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 11
In the mid-1920s, the powerfl warlords ofEthiopia were coming to the re­
aization that a young man of the nobility named Haile Selassie, also
known as Ras Tafari, was outcompetng tem all and nearing the point
where he could prodaim hirself their leader, unifing the county for the
first time in decades. Most of his rivals could not understand how this
wispy, , quiet, mild-mannered man had been able to take contol. Yet in
LAW 3                                                                             25

1927, Selassie was able to s                                                  u                                                            on the warlords, one at a tme, to come to
Addis Ababa to declare their loyalt and recognize bim as leader.
Some hurried, some hesitated, but only one, Dejazmach Bacha of
Sidamo, dared def Selassie totally. A blustery man, Balcha was a great
warior, and he considered the new leader weak ad unworthy. He point­
edly stayed away fom the capital. Finally Selassie, in his gentle but ster
way, commanded Balcha to come. The warlord decided to obey, but in
doing so he would                                                             t                                                            the tales on this pretender to the Ethiopian
throne: He would come to Addis Ababa at his own speed, and with an
army of 10,000 men, a force large enough to defend hirself, perhaps even
start a civil wa. Statoning this formidable force in a valley three rles
fom the capital, he waited, as a king would. Selassie would have to come
to bim.
Selassie did indeed send emissaries, asking Balca to attend a afer­
noon baquet in his honor. But Bacha, no fool, knew history-he knew
that previous kings and lords of Ethiopia had used banquets as a trap.
Once he was there and fll of drink, Selassie would have hir arrested or
murdered. To   signa his understanding of the situaton, he agreed to come
to the banquet, but only if he could bring his personal bodyguad-600 of
bis best soldiers, all amed ad ready to defend hir and themselves. To
Balcha's surprise, Selassie answered with the utmost politeness that he
would be honored to play host to such warriors.
On the way to the banquet, Balcha wared his soldiers not to get
drunk and to be on their guard. When they arrived at the palace, Slassie
was his cha                                                                   g best. He deferred to Balcha, teated hir as if he desper­
ately needed his approval and cooperaton. But Balcha refsed to be
charmed, and he wared Selassie that if he did not retur to his camp by
nightall, his army had orders to attac the capital. Selassie reacted as if
hurt by his mistrust. Over the meal, when it came tme for te taditona
singing of songs in honor of Etiopia's leaders, he made a point of allowing
only songs honoring the warlord of Sidamo. It seemed to Balcha that Se­
lassie was scared, intmidated by this great warrior who could not be out­
witted. Sensing the change, Balcha believed that he would be the one to
call the shots in the days to come.
At the end of the aferoon, Bacha ad his soldiers began their marc
back to camp ardst cheers and gun salutes. Looking back to the capital
over his shoulder, he planned his strategy-how his own soldiers would
march through the capita in triumph within weeks, and Selassie would be
put in his place, his place being either prison or death. When Balca cae
in sight of bis camp, however, he saw that something was terribly wrong.
Where before there had been colorfl tents stetching as far as the eye
could see, now there was nothing, only smoke from doused fires. What
devil's magie was this?
A witess told Balcha what had happened. During the banquet, a large
army, commanded by an ally of Selassie's, had stolen up on Balcha's en­
campment by a side route he had not seen. This amy had not come to
fight, however: Knowing that Balcha would}ave heard a noisy battle and
/
26                                                                            LAW 3

hurried back wit his 600-man bodyguard, Selassie had ,armed his own
tops with bakets of gold and cah. They had sUounded Balcha's army
ad proceeded to purchase every last one of their weapons. Those who re­
fsed were eaily intmidated. Within a few hours, Balcha's entre force had
been disarmed and scattered in al directons.
Realizing his danger, Balcha decided to march south wit his 600 sol­
diers to regroup, but the same army that had disarmed his soldiers blocked
his way. The other way out was to march on the capital, but Selassie had set
a lage army to defend it. Like a cess player, he had predicted Baca's
moves, and had checkated hir. For the first time in his life, Balcha sur­
rendered. To    repent his sins of pride and ambiton, he agreed to enter a
monastery.
Interpretation
Throughout Selassie's long reign, no one could quite figure hir out.
Etiopians like their leaders fierce, but Selassie, who wore the font of a
gentle, peace-loving man, lasted longer than any of tem. Never angry or
impatient, he lured his victims with sweet smiles, lulling them with carm
ad obsequiousness before he attacked. In te case of Balcha, Selassie
played on the man's wariness, his suspicion that te baquet was a trap-
which in fact it was, but not the one he expected. Selassie's way of allaying
Bacha's fears-lettng him bring his bodyguad to te banquet, giving hir
top billing tere, making him feel in contol-created a tick smoke screen,
conceaing te rea acton tree miles away.
Remember: The paraoid and wary ae often the easiest to deceive.
Win teir trust in one aea and you have a smoke screen tat blinds their
view in aother, lettng you creep up and level them wit a devastatng
blow. A helpful or apparently honest ge sture, or one that implies the oter
person's superiority-these are perfect diversionay devices.
Properly set up, the smoke screen is a weapon of great power. It en­
abled te gentle Selassie to totally destroy his enemy, without firing a single
bullet.
Do not underestimate the power of Tafari. He creeps
like a mouse hut he has jaws like a lion.
B(ll'!( ur Sidaiu's last wards bejiJre entering the ranastery
KEYS TO POWER
If you believe that deceivers are colorfl folk who mislead with elaborate
lies and tal tales, you are greatly mistaen. The best deceivers utlize a
blad ad inconspicuous front that calls no attenton to themselves. They
know that extravagant words ad gestures immediately rase suspicion. In­
stead, they envelop their mak in the familiar, the bana, the harmless. In
Yellow Kid Weil's dealings with Sam Geezil, te familia was a business
dea. In the Ethiopian case, it was Selassie's misleading obsequiousness­
exactly what-Balcha would have expected from a weaer walord.
LAW 3                                                                            27

Once you have lulled your suckers' attenton with the familiar, they
will not notice the deception being perpetated behind their backs. This
derives fom a simple truth: people can only focus on one thing at a time. It
is really too difficult for them to imagine that the blad and harmless per­
son they are dealing with is simultaneously setting up something else. The
grayer and more uniform the smoke in your smoke screen, the better it
conceals your intentions. In the decoy and red herring devices discussed in
Part I, you actvely distact people; in the smoke screen, you lull your vic­
tims, drawing them into your web. Because it is so hypnotic, this is often
the best way of concealing your intentions.
The simplest form of smoke screen is facial expression. Behind a bland,
unreadable exterior, all sorts ofmayhem can be planned, without detection.
This is a weapon that the most powerful men in history have leared to per­
fect. It was said that no one could read Franklin D. Roosevelt's face. Baron
James Rothschild made a lifelong practice of disguising his real thoughts be­
hind bland smiles and  nondescript looks. Stendhal wrote of Talleyrand,
"Never was a face less of a barometer. " Henry Kissinger would bore his op­
ponents around the negotating table to tears with his monotonous voice,
his blank look, his endless recitations of details; then, as their eyes glazed
over, he would suddenly hit them with a list of bold terms. Caught off­
guard, they would be easily intimidated.As one poker manual explains it,
"                                                                                W       hile playing his hand, the good player is seldom an actor. Instead he
practices a blad behavior that minimizes readable patters, frustrates ad
confses opponents, permits greater concentraton."
An    adaptable concept, the smoke screen can be practiced on a num­
ber of levels, all playing on the psychological principles of distracton and
misdirection. One of the most effective smoke screens is  the  noble gesture.
People want to believe apparently noble gestures are genuine, for the belief
is pleasant. They rarely notice how deceptive these gestures ca be.
The art dealer Joseph Duveen was once confronted with a terrible prob­
lem. The millionaires who had pad so dearly for Duveen's paintings were
running out of wall space, and with inheritance taxes getting ever higher, it
seemed unlikely that they would keep buying. The soluton was the Natona
Gallery ofA iWashington, D.C., which Duveen helped create in 1937 by
gettngAndrew Mellon to donate his collecton to it. The Natonal Gallery
was the perfect font for Duveen. In one gesture, his clients avoided taxes,
cleared wall space for new purchases, and reduced the number of paintings
on the market, maintaining the upward pressure on their prices. All     this
while the donors created the appearance of being public benefactors.
Another effective smoke screen is the patter, the establishment of a se­
ries of actions that seduce the victim into believing you will contnue in the
same way. The patter plays on the psycology of anticipaton: Our behav­
ior conforms to patters, or so we like to think.
In 1878 theAmerican robber baronJay Gould created a compay that
began to threaten the monopoly of the telegraph companyWester Union.
The directors of                                                                 W       ester Union decided to buy Gould's  company up
28                                                                               LAW 3

they had to spend a hefty sum, but they figured they had managed to rid
themselves of an irritating competitor. A few months later, though, Gould
was it at again, complaining he had been teated unfairly. He started up a
second company to compete with Wester Union and its new acquisition.
The same thing happened again: Wester Union bought hir out to shut
hir up. Soon the patter began for the third time, but now Gould went for
the jugular: He suddenly staged a bloody takeover struggle and managed
to gain complete control of Wester Union. He had established a patter
that had tricked the company's directors into tinking his goal was to be
bought out at a handsome rate. Once they paid hir off, they relaxed and
failed to notice that he was actually playing for higher stakes. The patter is
powerfl in that it deceives the other person into expectng the opposite of
what you are really doing.
Another psychological weakness on which to construct a smoke screen
is the tendency to mistake appearances for reaity-the feeling that if some­
one seems to belong to your group, their belonging must be real. This habit
makes the seamlss blend a very effectve front. The tick is simple: You sim­
ply blend in with those around you. The better you blend, the less suspi­
cious you become. During the Cold War of the 1950s and '60s, as is now
notorious, a slew of British civil servants passed secrets to the Soviets. They
went undetected for years because they were apparently decent chaps, had
gone to all the right schools, and fit the old-boy network perfectly. Blend­
ing in is the perfect smoke screen for spying. The better you do it, the bet­
ter you can conceal your intentions.
Remember: It takes patience and humility to dull your brilliant colors,
to put on the mask of the inconspicuous. Do not despair at having to wear
such a bland mask-it is ofen your unreadability that draws people to you
ad makes you appear a person of power.
Image: A Sheep's Skin.
A sheep never marauds,
a sheep never deceives,
a sheep is magnificently
dumb and docile. With a
sheepskin on his back,
a fox c an p a ss right
into the chicken coop.
Authority: Have you ever heard of a skillful general, who intends to
surprise a citadel, announcing his plan to his enemy? Conceal your
purpose and hide your progress; do not disclose the extent of your
designs until they cannot be opposed, until the combat is over. Win
the victory before you declare the war. In a word, imitate those war­
like people whose designs are not known except by the ravaged coun­
try through which they have passed. (Ninon de Lenclos, 1623- 1706)
LAW 3                                                                             29

REVERSAL
No s mokes c reen,  red herring,  fals e s inc erity,  or ay    other divers ionary  de­
vic e  will s ucc eed in c onc ealing y our intentions  if y ou already  have an es­
tablis hed  reputaton  for  dec eption  And  as y ou  get  older  and  ac hieve
s ucc ess,  it  ofen  bec omes  inc reas ingy   dffic ult  to  dis guis e y our c unning
Every one knows y ou prac tc e dec epton;  pers is t in play ing naive a nd y ou
run the rs k of s eeming the rankes t hy poc rite,  whic  will s everey  limit
y our room to maneuver I n  s uc h c as es  it is  better to own up,  to appear the
hones t rogue, o                                                                             ,  better, the repentant rogue N ot ony willy ou be admired
fory ourfankness, but,  mos t wonderf ul and st ange of all, y ou will be able
to c ontnuey our st atagems
As P. T Bar um,  the nineteenth-c entury  king of humbuggery,  grew
older,  he le                                                                                a                                                             ed to embrac e his  reputation as  a grand dec eiver At one
point he organized a buffalo hunt inN ewJers ey, c omplete with I ndias
and a few imported buffaloHe public ized the hunt as  genuine, but itc ame
off as s o c ompletely fak e that the c rowd,  ins tead of gettng a ngry  and as k­
ing for their money bac k,  was  greaty  amus ed They knewBarum pulled
t ic ks  all the tme;  that was  thes ec ret of his s ucc ess,  and they  loved him for
it.Le                                                                                        a                                                             ing a less on from this affair, B                             a   ums topped c onc ealing all of his
devic es,   even  revealing  his   dec eptions   in  a  tell- all  autobiography  As
K ierkegaard wrote, "The world wants  to be dec eived"
Finally,  although it is     wis er to divert attentionfom y our purpos es by
pres entng a bland,  familiar exterio                                                        ,   there are tmes  when the c olorf                          ,
c ons pic uous  ges ture  is     the  right  divers ionary  tac tc   The  great c harlatan
mountebanks  of s eventeenth-  and eighteenth-c enturyEurope us ed humor
and entertai nment to dec eive their audienc es Dazzled by    a greats how, the
public would not notc e thec harlatans ' real intentons . Thus thes tarc hala­
tan hims elf would appea r in town in a night- blac k c oac h drawn by    blac k
hors es  Clowns,  tghtrope walkers,  and s tar entertainers  would acc ompany
him,  pulling people in to his  demonst atons  of elixirs  and quac k potions .
The c harlata made enterta inment s eem like the bus iness  of the day ;  the
bus iness of the day was ac tualy the s ale of the elixirs and quac k potons.
Spec tac le and entertainment, c leary,  are exc ellent devc es  to c onc eal
y our  intentons,  but  they  c annot  be  us ed  indefi nitey  The  public  grows
tired and s us pic ious, and eventualy c atc hes on to the tric k. And indeed the
c harlatans  had  to  move  quic ky   fom  town  to  town,  before  word s pread
that the potions  were us eless  a nd the entertai nment a t ic Powerfl peo­
pI e with bland exteriors,   on the other hand- the Talley rands,  the Roth­
sc hilds,   the Selass ies -c an  prac tc e  their  dec eptions  in  the s ame  plac e
throughout their lifetmes  Their ac t never wea rs     thin,  a nd rarey c aus es
s us pic ion. The c olorfl s moke sc reen s hould be us ed c autious ly,  then,  and
ony when the occ as ion is    right
30                                                                                           LAW 3
I
I

LAW
4
ALWAYS SAY LESS
TRAN NECESSARY
JUDGMENT
Wen you are trying to impress peopl with word, the
more you say, the moe common you appear, and the lss
in contrl. Even iyou are saying something banal, it will
seem orgnal i you make it vague, oen-ended, and
sphinxlike. Powerful peol impress and intimidate by
saying lss. The more you say, the more likely you are to
say something foolish.
31

TRANS GRESS I ON OF THE LA                                                       W
Gnaeus Marcius, also known as Coriolaus, was a great military hero of
Down on his luck, [the
acient Rome. In te first half of the                                             f                                                                                 century B.C. he won many impor­
screenwriterJ Michael
A rien went to New                                                               tat battles, saving the city fom calamity time and time agan. Because he
York in 1 944. To   drown                                                        spent most ofhis time on the battefield, few Romans knew him personally,
his sorrows he paid a
maing him something of a legenda                                                 figure.
visit to the famous
I 454 B.C.,  Coriolaus decided it was time t exploit his reputaton
restaurant "21." In the
lobby, he ran into Sam                                                           and enter politcs. He stood for electon to the high rank of consul. Candi­
Goldwyn, who affe red                                                            dates for tis position traditonaly made a public address early in the race,
the somewhat impracti­
and when Coriolanus came before the people, he began by displaying te
cal advice that he
dozens of scas he had accumulated over seventeen years of fighting for
should buy racehorses.
At the bar A rien met                                                            Rome. Few in te crowd really head te lengthy speech that  followed;
Louis B. Mayer, an old                                                           those scars, proof of his valor and patriotism, moved the people to tears.
acquaintance, who
Coriolanus's election seemed certain.
asked him what were
When te polling day arrived, however, Coriolanus made an  entry
his plans for the future.
"I was just talking to                                                           into the forum escorted by te entre senate and by the cit's patricians, the
Sam Goldwyn . . . "                                                              aristocracy. The common people who saw this were disturbed by such a
began Arien. "How
                                                                                 blustering show of confidence on electon day.
much did he offer
you ? "  in terrup ted                                                           And then Coriolanus spoke agan, mostly addressing the weathy citi­
Mayer. "Not enough, "                                                            zens who  had accompanied him. His words were  arrogant and insolent.
he replied evasively.                                                            Claiming certain victory in te vote, he boasted of his battlefield exploits,
" Would you take fifteen
                                                                                 made sour jokes tat appealed only to the paticias, voiced angry accusa­
thousand for thirty
weeks ? "  asked Mayer.                                                          tons against his opponents, and speculated on the riches he would bring to
No hesitation this time.                                                         Rome. This time the people listened: They had not realized that this leg­
" Yes, " said Arien.
endary soldier was also a common braggart.
THE L1TTLE, BROWN
News  of Coriolanus's second speech  spread  quickly through Rome,
BOOK Or ANECDOTES,
CLIFTON FADIMAN,                                                                 and the people                                                                    ted out in great numbers to  mae  sure  he was not
FD., 1985
elected. Defeated, Coriolanus retured to te battlefield, bitter and vowing
revenge on the common folk who had voted against him. Same weeks later
a large shipment of grain arrived in Rome. The senate was ready to distrib­
ute this food to the people, for free, but just as they were preparing to vote
on the  question Coriolanus  appeared  on te  scene  and took the  senate
floor. The distributon, he argued, would have a harmful effect on the city
One oft-told tale about                                                          as a whole. Several senators appeared won over, and the vote on the distri­
Kissinger . . .                                                                  buton fell into doubt. Coriolanus did not stop there : He went on to con­
involved a report that
demn the  concept of democracy itself.  He  advocated gettng rid of the
Winston Lord had
people's representatves-the tibunes-and turing over the govering of
worked on for days.
After giving it to                                                               te city to the paticias.
Kissinger he got it                                                              W                                                                                 hen word of Coriolanus's latest speech reached the people, their
back with the notation,
ager knew no bounds. The tribunes were sent to te senate to demand
"Is this the best you
that Coriolanus appear before them. He refsed. Riots broke out all over
can da? " Lord rewrote
and polished and                                                                 the city. The senate, fearing the people's wrath, finally voted in favor of the
finally resubmitted it;
grain  distibution. The tribunes were  appeased, but the people  still  de­
back it came with the
manded that Coriolanus speak to tem and apologize. I he repented, and
same curt question.
                                                                                 After redrafting it one                                                           agreed to keep his opinions to himself, he would be allowed to retur to
                                                                                 more time-and once                                                                the battlefield.
                                                                                 again getring the same
                                                                                                                                                                   Coriolanus did appear one last tme before the people, who listened to
32                                                                               LAW 4

hir in rapt silence. He started slowly ad sofly, but as the speec went on,       question from
Kissinger-Lord
he became more and more blunt. Yet again he hurled insults! His tone was
snapped, "Damn it, yes,
arrogant, his expression disdainfl. The more he spoke, the angrier te
it's the best I can do. "
people became. Finally they shouted hir down and silenced hir.                   To   which Kissinger
The tibunes conferred, condemned Coriolanus to death, and ordered                replied: "Fine, then I
guess I'll read it this
the magistrates to tae hir at once to the top of the Tarpeian rock and
time. "
throw hir over. The delighted crowd seconded the decision. The pati­
KISSINGER,
cians, however, managed to intervene, and the sentence was commuted to           WALTER ISAACSON,
1992
a lifelong banishment. When the people found out that Rome's great mili­
tary hero would never retur to the city, they celebrated in the steets. In
fact no one had ever seen such a celebration, not even afer the defeat of a
foreign enemy.
Interpretation
Before his entrance into politics, the name of Coriolanus evoked awe.            The King [Louis XIV;
His battlefield accomplishments showed hir as a ma of great brav­                maintains the most
impenetrable secrecy
ery. Since the citizens knew little about hir, all kinds of legends became at­
about affairs of State.
taced to his name. The moment he appeared before the Roman citzens,
The ministers attend
however, and spoke his mind, all that grandeur and mystery vanished. He          council meetings, but
bragged and blustered like a common soldier. He insulted and slandered           he confides his plans to
them only when he has
people, as if he felt threatened and insecure. Suddenly he was not at all
reflected at length upon
what the people had imagined. The discrepancy between the legend and
them and has come to
the reality proved immensely disappointing to those who wanted to be­            a definite decision.
lieve in their hero. The more Coriolanus said, the less powerful he ap­          I wish you might see
the King. His expres­
peared-a person who cannot control his words shows that he cannot
sion is inscrutable; his
control hirself, and is unworthy of respect.
eyes like those of a fox.
Had Coriolanus said less, the people would never have had cause to               He never discusses
be offended by hir, would never have known his tue feelings. He would            State affairs except with
                                                                                 his ministers in Coun­
have maintained his powerful aura, would certainly have been elected con­
                                                                                 eil. When he ,peaks to
sul, and would have been able to accomplish his atidemocratc goals. But          courtiers he refers only
the human tongue is a beast that few can master. It strans constantly to         to their respective
prerogatives or duties.
break out of its cage, and if it is not tamed, it will run wild and cause you
Even the most frivo­
grief. Power cannot accrue to those who squander their teasure of words.
lous ofhis utterances
has the air of being the
Oysters open completely when the moon is JuZ; and when the crab sees one         pronouncement of an
orude.
it throws a piece oJ stone or seaweed into it and the oyster cannot close
PRIMI VISCONTI,
again so that it ser ves the crab Jor meat. Such is the Jate oJ him who opens
QUOl'ED IN
his mouth too much and thereby puts himsel at the mercy oJ the listener          LOUIS XIV.
LOUIS BERTRAND,
I,eonardo da Vinci, 1452-151 9
1 928
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the court of Louis XIV, nobles and ministers would spend days and
nights debating issues of state. They would confer, argue, make and break
aliances, and argue again, until finally the critical moment arrived: Two of
them would be chosen to represent the different sides to Louis hirself,
who would decide what should be done. Afer these persons were cosen,
LAW 4                                                                            33

everyone would argue some more: How should the issues be phrased?
What would appeal to Louis, what would annoy him? At what tme of day
Unduliji,l words ofa
should the representatves approach him, ad in what part of the Versailles
subjecl do oflen lake
deeper rool than Ihe                                                             palace? What expression should they have on their faces?
memory of ill deeds, , , ,                                                       Finally, afer all this was settled, the fatend moment would finally ar­
The late Earl of Essex
rive. The two men would approach Louis-always a delicate matter-and
lolt Queen Elizabeth
when they finally had his ear, they would talk about the issue at hand,
that her condition.l'
were as cTOoked a,l' her                                                         spelling out the options in detail.
carcass; but il cosl hir                                                         Louis would listen in silence, a most enigmatc look on his face. Fi­
his head, which his
                                                                                 naly, when each had finished his presentaton and had asked for the king's
insurrection had nol
COsl hir butfor thai                                                             opinion, he would look at tem bot and say, "I shal see." Then he would
speech.                                                                          walk away.
SIR WAU'ER RALE.IGH,                                                             The ministers and courters would never hear another word on this
1554-1618
subject from the king-they would simply see the result, weeks later, when
he would come to a decision and act. He would never bother to consult
them on the matter again.
Interpretation
Louis XIV was a man of very few words. His most famous remark is
"L'Uat, c'est moi" ("I am the state"); nothing could be more pithy yet more
eloquent. His infamous "I shall see" was one of several extremely short
phrases that he would apply to all maner of requests.
Louis was not always this way; as a young man he was known for talk­
ing at length, delightng in his own eloquence. His later tacitumity was self­
imposed, an act, a mask he used to keep everybody below him off-balance.
No one knew exactly where he stood, or could predict bis reactions. No
one could ty to deceive him by saying what they thought he wanted to
hear, because no one knew what he wated to hear. As they taked on and
on to the silent Louis, they revealed more and more about themselves, in­
formaton he would later use against them to great effect.
In the end, Louis's silence kept those around him terrified ad under
his thumb. It was one of the foundations of his power. As Saint-Simon
wrote, "No one knew as weIl as he how to seIl his words, his smile, even his
glances. Everything in him was valuable because he created differences,
and his majesty was enhanced by the spaseness of his words."
It is even more damaging for a minister to say foolish things than to do them.
Cardinal de Retz, 1 613-16 79
KEYS TO POWER
Power is in many ways a game of appearances, and when you say less than
necessary, you inevitably appear greater and more powerfl than you ae.
YOUf silence will make other people uncomfortable. Humans are machines
of interpretaton and explanation; they have to know what you are think­
ing. When you careflly control what you reveal, they cannot pierce yOUf
intentons or your meaning.
34                                                                               LAW 4

YOUf short answers and silences will put them on the defensive, and
they will jump in, nervously filling the silence with all kinds of comments
that will reveal valuable informaton about them ad their weanesses.
They will leave a meeting with you feeling as if they had been robbed, and
tey will go hore and ponder YOUf every word. This exta attenton to
YOUf brief comments will only add to your power.
Saying less than necessary is not for kings and statesmen only. In most
areas of life, the less you say, the more profound and mysterious you ap­
pear. As a young man, the artist Andy Warhol had the revelation that it was
generally impossible to get people to do what you wanted them to do by
taking to them. They would tur against you, subvert YOUf wishes, disobey
you out of sheer perversity. He once told a fiend, "I leaed that you actu­
ally have more power when you shut up."
In his later life Warhol employed tis stategy wit great success. His
interviews were exercises in oracular speec: He would say someting
vage and ambiguous, and the interviewer would tist in circles trying to
fgre it out, imagining there was someting prafound behind his often
meaningless phrases. Warhol rarely talked ab out his work; he let others do
the interpretng. He claimed to have leamed this technique from tat mas­
ter of enigma Marcel Duchamp, anoter twentieth-century artist who real­
ized early on that te less he said about his work, the more people taked
about it. And the more they talked, te more valuable his work becae.
By saying less than necessary you create the appearance of meaning
ad power. Also, the less you say, the less risk you run of saying something
foolish, even dangeraus. In 1825 a new czar, Nicholas I, ascended the
trone of Russia. A rebellion immediately broke out, led by liberals de­
mading that the country moderize-that its industies and civil struc­
tres catch up with the rest of Europe. Brutally crushing this rebellion (the
Decembrist Uprising), Nicholas I sentenced one of its leaders, Kondraty
Ryleyev, to death. On the day of the execution Ryleyev stood on the ga­
lows, te noose around his neck. The trapdoor opened-but as Ryleyev
dagled, te rape brake, dashing hir to te ground. At the time, events
like tis were considered signs of providence or heavenly will, and a man
saved fom executon this way was usually pardoned. As Ryleyev got to his
feet, brised and dirtied but believing his neck had been saved, he caled
out to the crowd, "You see, in Russia they don't know how to do anyting
properly, not even how to mae rape!"
A messenger immediately went to the Winter Palace with news ofte
faled hanging. Vexed by this disappointng turabout, Nicholas I never­
teless began to sign the padon. But then: "Did Ryleyev say aything afer
tis miracle?" the czar asked the messenger. "Sire," the messenger replied,
"he said that in Russia they don't even know how to mae rope."
"In that case," said the Czar, "let us prove te contrary," and he tore
up te pardon. The next day Ryleyev was hanged again. This tme the
rope did not brea.
Lea the lesson: Once the words are out, you cannot tae them bac.
Keep them under contol. Be partcularly careful with sarcasm: The mo-
LAW                                                                            4   35

mentay satisfaction you gain with your biting words will be outweighed by
the price you pay.
I m a g e :
The Orade at Delphi.
When vi si tors consulted the
Orade, the priestess would utter
a few enigmatic words that seemed
full of meaning and import. No one
disobeyed the words of the Oracle­
they  held power over life  and death.
Authority: Never start moving your own lips and teeth before
the subordinates do. The longer I keep quiet, the sooner others
move their lips and teeth. As they move their lips and teeth, I
can thereby understand their real intentions                                           If the sovereign
is  not mysterious, the ministers  will find opportunity to  take
and take. (Han-fei-tzu, Chinese philosopher, third century B.C.)
REVERSAL
There are times when i t  i s  unwise t o  b e  silent. Silence can arouse suspicion
and even insecurity, especially in your superiors; a vague or                          abiguous
comment can open you up to interpretations you had not bargained for. Si­
lence and saying less than necessay must be practiced with caution, then,
and in the right situations. It is occasionally wiser to imitate the court jester,
who plays the fool but knows he is smarter than the king. He talks and talks
and entertains, and no one suspects that he is more than just a foo1.
Also, words can sometimes act as a kind of smoke screen for any de­
ception you might practice. By bending your listener's ear with                        t, you
ca distract and mesmerize them; the more you talk, in fact, the less suspi­
cious of you they become. The verbose are not perceived as sly and ma­
nipulative but as helpless ad unsophisticated. This is the reverse of the
silent policy employed by the  powerfl :  By  talking more,  and  making
yourself appear weaker ad less intelligent than your mark, you ca prac­
tice deception with greater ease.
36                                                                                     LAW 4

LAW
5
SO MU CH D E PEND S  ON
REPUTATION-GUARD IT
WITH YOUR LIFE
JUDGMENT
Reputation is the corerstone of power Through reputa­
tion alone you can intimidate and win; once it slips,
however, you are vulnerabl, and will be attacked on alt
sides.  Make your reputation unassailabl. Always be
alert to potential attacks and thwart them before     the
happen. Meanwhile,  lear to destry your enemies by
opening hols in  their own reputations.  Then stand
aside and lt public oinion hang them.
37

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
During China's War of the Three Kingdoms (A,D, 207-265), the great gen­
'1                                                                             111,                                                                           ,1 , 1 11 1 1                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             eral Chuko Liang, leading the forces of the Shu Kingdom, dispatched his
' I  H I < :  I'_ ,                                                                                                                                           1 1111  II IL
                                                                                                                                                              I'i  ILI I-                                                    vast amy to a distat camp while he rested in a small town with a handful
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of soldiers, Suddenly sentineIs hurried in with the alarming news that an
                                                                               A frighllili  pidemic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sOll   enemy force of over 150,000 troops under Sima Yi was approacing, With
                                                                               To   earlh hy lIeaven                                                                                                                         only a hundred men to defend hir, Chuko Liang's situaton was hopeless,
intenf io vent
The enemy would finally capture this renowned leader,
Ils lilrY on a sinflll
Without lamenting his fate, or wasting time trying to figure out how he
world, 10 eall
lt hy its righttili name,                                                      had been caught, Liang ordered his toops to take down their flags, throw
the pestilence,                                                                open the eity gates, and hide, He hirself then took a seat on the most visi­
ThaI A cheron-fil!ing
ble part of the city's wall, wearing a Taoist robe. He lit some incense,
vial of virulence
strummed his lute, and began to chant. Minutes later he could see the vast
Had fallen on every
anirnll/.                                                                      enemy army approaching, an endless phalanx of soldiers. Petending not
Not al! were dead, hlll                                                        to notice them, he continued to sing and play the lute.
al! lay near to dying,
                                                                               Soon the army stood at the town gates, At its head was Sima Yi, who
Ami none was any
[onger Irying                                                                  instantly recognized the man on the wall.
To  find new fllcl 10 feed                                                     Even so, as his soldiers itched to enter the unguarded town through its
life 's f/ickering fires.                                                      open gates, Sima Yi hesitated, held tem back, and studied Liang on the
No l')ds exciled Iheir
wal. Then, he ordered a immediate and speedy reteat.
desire:;;
No more did wo[w's
and foxes rove                                                                 Interpretation
In seareh oI harmless,
Chuko Liang was commonly known as the "Sleeping Dragon." His ex­
helples,- prey;
ploits in the War of the Three Kingdoms were legendary. Once a man
A mi d(lve wOlild nol
consort with doV,                                                              daiming to be a disaffected enemy lieutenant came to his camp, offering
Fi" love amijoy hud                                                            help ad information. Liang instantly recognized the situation as a setup;
fown away.
this man was a false deserter, and should be beheaded. At the last minute,
Thc Lion a"slmed Ihe
though, as the                                                                 a                                                                              was about to fall, Liag stopped the execution and of­
chair to say: "Dear
friends,                                                                       fered to spare the man's life if he agreed to become a double agent. Grate­
I do"ht nol it 's fi"                                                          ful and terrified, the man agreed, ad began supplying false informaton to
heaven :, high ends
the enemy. Liang won battle after battle.
That on lIS sinners woe
On another occasion Liag stole a militay sea and created fase docu­
mustf"II.
Lei him of lIS WllO 's                                                         ments dispatching his enemy's toops to distant locatons. Once the troops
sinned the mosl                                                                had dispersed, he was able to capture three eites, so that he controlled an
filii viclim 10 the
entire corridor of the enemy's kingdom. He also once ticked the enemy
avcnging heavenly
into believing one of its best generals was a trator, forcing the man to es­
host,
Anti may he win salva­                                                         cape and join forces with Liag. The Sleeping Dragon careflly cultvated
lion for lIS all;                                                              his reputation of being the deverest man in China, one who always had a
For history leaches lIS
trick up his sleeve. As powerfl- as any weapon, this reputaton struck fear
that in thesc erises
into his enemy.
We mllst lIlike
sacrifices.                                                                    Sima Yi had fought against Chuko Liang dozens of tmes and knew
Undeceived and ster­                                                           hir weIl. When he came on the empty city, with Liang praying on the
cyed, 111\' inspect
wall, he was stunned. The Taoist robes, the chanting, the incense-this had
GlIr conscience. As I
to be a game of intimidation. The man was obviously tauntng hir, daing
recolled,
To   pllt InY greedy                                                           hir to walk into a trap. The game was so obvious that for one moment it
appetite to sleep,
crossed Yi's mind that Liang actually wa alone, ad desperate. But so
f've hanljllctcd on
great was his fear of Liang that he dared not risk finding out. Such is the
38                                                                             LAW 5

power of reputation. It ca put a vast army on the defensive, even force          many a sheep
Who'd injured me in
them into retreat, without a single arrow being fired.
no re.\'pect,
And even in my time
FoT as Cicero says, even those who argue against fame still want the books the   been known to try
write against it to bear their name in the title and hope to become famous for   Shepherd pie.
lf need be, then, f 'll die.
despising it. Ever ything else is subject to bare: we will let ourJends have
Yet I suspect
our goods and our lives if need be; but a case of sharing our fame and
That others also ought
making someone else the gift   of our reputation is hardly to be found.          to own their " ins.
Montaigne, 1533-1592                                                             It' only fair that all
                                                                                 should do their hest
                                                                                 To   single out th e
                                                                                 guiltiest. "
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II                                                         "Sire, you 're too good
In 1841 the young P. T. Baum, trying to establish his reputaton as Amer­         a king, " the Fox hegins;
                                                                                 "Such scruples are too
ica's premier showman, decided to purcase the American Museum in
                                                                                 delicate. My word,
Manhattan and tur it into a collecton of curiosites that would secure his        To   eat sheep, that
fare. The problem was that he had no money. The museum's asking price            profane and vulgar
herd,
was $ 15,000, but Barum was able to put together a proposal that appealed
That 's  sin? Nay, Sire,
to the instituton's owners even though it replaced cash up font with
enough for such a crew
dozens of guarantees and references. The owners cae to a verbal agree­           To   be devoured by
ment with Baum, but at the last minute, the principal parter chaged              such as you;
While of the shepherds
his mind, and the museum and its collecton were sold to the directors of
we may say
Peale's Museum. Baum was infuriated, but the partner explained that
That they deserved the
business was business-the museum had been  sold to Peale's because               worst they got,
Peae's had a reputation and Baum had none.                                       Theirs heing the lot
that over us heasts plot
Baum immediately decided that if he had no reputaton to bak on,
A jimsy dream­
his only recourse was to ruin the reputaton of Peale's. Accordingly he
begotten sway. "
launched a letter-writng campaign in the newspapers, calling the owners a                                            Thus spake the Fox,
bunch of "broken-down bank directors" who had no idea how to                     r                           a mu­   and toady cheers rose
high,
seum or entertain people. He waed the public against buying Peale's
While none da red cast
stock, since the business's purchase of another museum would invariably
too cold an eye
spread its resources thin. The campaign was effectve, the stoc plum­             On Tigers, Bears, and
meted, ad with no more confidence in Peale's track record and reputa­            other eminences '
Most unpardonable
tion, the owners of the American Museum reneged on their deal and sold
offences.
te whole thing to Baum.
Each, ofnever mind
It took years for Peale's to recover, ad they never forgot what Bar­             what currish breed,
num had done. Mr. Peale hirself decided to attack Baum by building a             Was really a saint, they
all agreed.
reputaton for "high-brow entertainment," promotng his museum's pro­
Then came the Ass, to
grams as more scientfic than those of his vulgar competitor. Mesmerism
say: "1 do recall
(hypnotism) was one of Peale's "scientfic" attactons, and for a while it         How once I crossed an
ahhey-mead
drew big crowds and was quite successfl. To   fight back, Baum decided
Where hllnger, grass in
to attac Peale's reputaton yet again.
plenty, and wilhal,
Baum organized a riyal mesmeric performance i which he hirself                   I have no doubt, some
apparently put a little girl into a trance. Once she seemed to have fallen       imp ofgreed,
deeply under, he tied to hypnotize members of the audience-but no mat­           Assailed me, ami I
                                                                                 shaved a tongue 's­
ter how hard he tied, none of the spectators fell under his speIl, and may
                                                                                 b readth wide
of them began to laugh. A frustrated Baum finally anounced that to               Where frankly f 'd no
prove the little girl's trance was real, he would cut off one of her fingers     right to any grass. "
                                                                                 LAW 5                       39

All forthwith fell full                                                           without her noticing. But as he sharpened the knife, the little girl's eyes
cry upon the Ass:
popped open and she ran away, to the audienee's delight. He repeated this
A Wolf ofsome book­
and other parodies for several weeks. Soon no one eould take Peale's show
learning testified
That that curst beast                                                             seriously, and attendanee went way down. Within a few weeks, the show
must suffer their                                                                 dosed. Over the next few years Baum established a reputaton for audae­
despite,
ity and eonsummate showmanship that lasted his whole life. Peale's reputa­
That gallskinned
tion, on the other hand, never reeovered.
author oftheir piteous
plight.
They judged him fit                                                               Interpretation
for nought but
Baum used two different taetes to ruin Peale's reputation. The first was
gallows-bait:
simple: He  sowed doubts about the museum's stability ad solveney.
How vile, another's
grass to sequestrate!                                                             Doubt is a powerfl weapon: Onee you let it out of the bag with insidious
His death alone could                                                             rumors, YOUf opponents are in a horrible dilemma. On the one hand they
expiate
ean deny the rumors, even prove that you have slandered them. But a
A crime so heinuus, as
juli weil he learns.                                                              layer of suspieion will remain: Why are they defending themselves so des­
The court, as you 're of                                                          perately? Maybe the rumor has some truth to it? If, on the other hand, they
great or poor estate,                                                             take the high road and ignore you, the doubts, unrefted, will be even
Will paint you either
stronger. If done eorreetly, the sowing of rumors ean so infriate and unset­
white or black by turns.
tle YOUf rivals that in defending themselves they will make numerous mis­
THF BEST FABLES
OF LA FON'IAINE,                                                                  takes. This is the perfeet weapon for those who have no reputaton of teir
JEAN DE LA FONTAINE,
own to work fom.
1621-1095
Onee Baum did have a reputation of his own, he used the seeond,
gentler taetie, the fake hypnotsm demonstation: He ridieuled his rivals'
reputaton. This too was extremely sueeessfl. Onee you have a solid base
of respeet, ridieuling YOUf opponent both puts hir on the defensive and
draws more attenton to you, enhancing your own reputation. Outight
slander and insult are too stong at this point; they are ugly, and may hurt
you more than help you. But gentle barbs and moekery suggest that you
have a strong enough sense of your own worth to enjoy a good laugh at
your rival's expense. A humorous front ean mae you out as a harmless en­
tertainer while poking holes in the reputaton of YOUf rival.
It is easier to cope with a bad conscience than with a bad reputation.
Friedrich Nietzsehe, 1 844-1900
KEYS TO POWER
The people around us, even OUf dosest friends, will always to some extent
remain mysterious and unfathomable. Their eharaeters have seeret reeesses
that they never reveal. The unknowableness of other people eould prove
disturbing if we thought about it long enough, sinee it would make it im­
possible for us really to judge other people. So we prefer to ignore this fact,
and to judge people on their appearanees, on what is most visible to OUf
eyes-clothes, gestures, words, aetons. In the social realm, appearanees are
the barometer of almost all of OUf judgments, and you must never be mis­
led into believing otherwise. One false slip, one awkwad or sudden cange
in YOUf appearanee, ean prove disastous.
40                                                                                LAW 5

This is the reaon for the supreme importance of making and man­
taining a reputation that is of your own creaton.
That reputaton will protect you in the dangerous game of appear­
ances, distractng the probing eyes of others fom knowing what you are
really like, and giving you a degree of contol over how the world judges
you-a powerfl positon to be in. Reputaton has a power like magic:
With one stoke of its wand, it ca double your stength. It can also send
people scurrying away from you. Whether the exact same deeds appear
brilliant or dreadfl can depend entrely on the reputaton of the doer.
In the aneient Chinese court of the Wei kingdom there was a man
named Mi Tzu-hsia who had a reputaton for supreme eivility and graeious­
ness. He became the mler's favorite. It was a law in Wei that "whoever
rides secretly in the mler's coach shall have his feet cut off," but when Mi
Tzu-hsia's mother fell ill, he used the royal coach to visit her, pretending
that the mler had given hir permission. When the mler found out, he said,
"How dutiful is Mi Tzu-hsia! For his mother's sake he even forgot that he
was committng a crime making hir liable to lose his feet!"
Another tme the two of them took a stroll in an orchard. Mi Tzu-hsia
began eating a peach that he could not finish, and he gave the mler the
other haf to eat. The mler remarked, "You love me so much that you would
even forget your own saliva taste and let me eat the rest of the peach!"
Later, however, envious fellow courters, spreading word that Mi Tzu­
hsia was actually devious and arrogant, succeeded in damaging his reputa­
tion; the mler came to see his actions in a new light. "This fellow once rode
in my coach under pretense of my order," he told the courtiers agrily,
"and another tme he gave me a half-eaten peach." For the same actons
that had charmed the mler when he was the favorite, Mi Tzu-hsia now had
to suffer the penalties. The fate of his feet depended solely on the strength
of his reputation.
In the beginning, you must work to establish a reputaton for one out­
standing quality, whether generosit or honesty or cunning. This quaity
sets you apart and gets other people to talk ab out you. You then make your
reputation known to as many people as possible (subtly, though; take cae
to build slowly, and with a firm foundation), ad watch as it spreads like
wildfire.
A solid reputation  increases your presence and exaggerates your
strengths without your having to spend much energy. It can also create an
aura around you that will instill respect, even fea. In the fighting in the
North African desert during World Wa II, the German general Erwin
Rommel had a reputation for cunning and for deceptive maneuvering that
struck terror into everyone who faced hir. Even when his forces were de­
pleted, and when British tanks outumbered his by five to one, entire eites
would be evacuated at the news of his approach.
As they say, your reputation inevitably precedes you, and if it inspires
respect, a lot of your work is done for you before you arrive on the scene,
or utter a single word.
Your success seems destined by your past triumphs. Much of the suc-
LAW 5                                                                           41

cess of Henry Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy rested on bis reputaton for
ironing out differences; no one wanted to be seen as so unreasonable that
Kissinger could not sway hir. A peace teaty seemed a fait accompli as
soon as Kissinger's name became involved in the negotiatons.
Make your reputation simple and base it on one sterling quality. This
single quality-                                                                   fficiency, say, or seductveness-becomes a kind of calling
card that announces your presence and places others under a speIl. A repu­
tation for honesty will alow you to practce al manner of deception.
Casanova used bis reputaton as a great seducer to pave the way for his f­
ture conquests; women who had heard of his powers became immensely
curious, and wanted to discover for themselves what had made hir so ro­
mantically successful.
Perhaps you have already stained your reputation, so that you are pre­
vented from establishing a new one. In such cases it is wise to associate
with someone whose image counteracts your own, using their good name
to whitewash and elevate yours. It is hard, for example, to erase a reputa­
tion for dishonesty by yourself; but a paragon of honesty can help. When
P. T Barum wanted to dean up a reputation for promotng vulgar enter­
tainment, he brought te singer Jenny Lind over from Europe. She had a
stellar, high-dass reputation, ad the American tour Bamum sponsored for
her greatly enhanced his own image. Similaly the great robber barons of
nineteent-century America were long unable to rid themselves of a repu­
tation for cruelty ad mean-spiritedness. Only when they bega collecting
art, so that the names of Morgan and Frick became permanently associated
with those of da Vinci and Rembrandt, were they able to sofen their un­
pleasant image.
Reputation is a teasure to be caeflly collected and hoarded. Espe­
cially when you are first establishing it, you must protect it strictly, antci­
patng all attacks on it. Once it is solid, do not let yourself get angry or
defensive at the sladerous comments of your enemiesthat reveals inse­
curity, not confidence in your reputation. Tae the high road instead, and
never appear desperate in your self-defense. On the other had, a attac
on another man's reputaton is a potent weapon, particularly when you
have less power than he does. He has much more to lose in such a battle,
and your own thus-far-small reputation gives hir a small target when he
tries to retur your fire. Bamum used such campaigns to great effect in his
early career. But tis tactic must be practced with skill; you must not seem
to engage in petty vengeance. If you do not break your enemy's reputaton
deverly, you will inadvertently ruin your own.
Thomas Edison, considered the inventor who haessed electricity,
believed that a workable system would have to be based on direct cur­
rent (DC). When the Serbia scientist Nikola Tesla appeaed to have suc­
ceeded in creating a system based on alteratng current (AC), Edison was
frious. He determined to ruin Tesla's reputaton, by making the public be­
lieve that the AC system was inherenty unsafe, and Tesla irresponsible in
promoting it.
To this end he captured all kinds of household pets and electrocuted
42                                                                                LAW 5

them to death with an AC current. When this wasn't enough, in 1890 he got
New York State prison authorities to organize the word's first execution by
electocution, using an AC current. Eut Edison's electrocuton experiments
had all been with small creatures; the carge was too weak, and the man
was only half killed. In perhaps the county's cruelest state-authorized exe­
cuton, the procedure had to be repeated. It was an awfl spectacle.
Although, in the long run, it is Edison's name that has survived, at the
time his  campaign  damaged  his  own reputaton  more  than  Tesla's.  He
backed off.                                                                    Te lesson is simple-never go too far in attacks like these, for
that will draw more attention to your own vengeflness than to the person
you are slandering. When your own reputaton is solid, use subtIer tactics,
such as satire and ridicule, to weaken YOUf opponent while making you out
as a charming rogue. The mighty lion toys with the mouse that crosses his
path-any other reacton would ma his fearsome reputation.
Image:
A Mine Full of
Diamonds and Rubies.
You dug for it, you found it,
and your wealth is now assured.
Guard it with YOUf life. Robbers and thieves
will appear from all sides. Never take YOUf wealth
for granted, and constantly renew it-time
will diminish the jewels' luster,
and bury them from sight.
Authority: Therefore I should wish OUf courtier to bolster up his inherent
worth with skill and cunning, and ensure that whenever he has to go where
he is a stranger, he is preceded by a good reputation                          For the fame
which appears to rest on the opinions of many fosters a certain unsha­
able belief in a man's worth which is then easily strengthened in minds
already thus disposed and prepared. (Baldassare Castiglione, 1478- 1529)
REVERSAL
There is no possible Reversal. Reputation is critcal; there are no excep­
tons to this law. Perhaps, not caring what others think of you, you gain a
reputation for insolence and arrogace, but that can be a valuable image in
itself-Oscar Wilde used it to great advantage. Since we must live in soci­
ety  ad must depend on the  opinions of others, there is nothing to be
gained by neglecting your reputaton.  By not caing how you are  per­
ceived, you let others decide this for you. B the master of your fate, and
also of your reputation.
LAW 5                                                                          43

LAW
6
C OURT ATTENTION
AT ALL C OST
JUDGMENT
Everthing is judged by   its appearnce; what is unseen
counts for nothing.  Nee Zt yoursei get lost in the
crwd, then, or bured in oblivion. Stand out. Be con­
spicuous, at all cost. Make yoursei a magnet of  atten­
tion by appearng larger, more colorful, more mysterious
than the bland and timid masses.
4

PART I :  SURROUND YOUR NAME WITH THE
SENSATIONAL AND SCANDALOUS
Drw attention to yourselb creating an unorgettabl, een controversial
image. Court scandal. Do anything to make yoursel seem larger than lie
and shine more brghtly than those around you. Make no distinction be
tween kinds 0/ attention-notoriety 0/ any sort will brng you power. Better
to be slandered and attacked than igored.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
P. T Ba                                                                           um, America's premier nineteenth-century showman, started his
                                                                                  THE  WASP                                                                       y                                    TIW
career as an assistant to the owner of a circus, Aaon Turer. In 1836 the          PHI\CE
circus stopped in Annapolis, Maryland, for a series of performances. On
                                                                                                                                                                  A wasp named Pin TaU
the moring of opening day, Bamum took a stroll through town, weaing a                                                                                             was long in quest of
new black suit. People started to follow hir.  Someone in the gathering                                                                                           some deed that would
make hir forever
crowd shouted out that he was the Reverend Ephraim K. Avery, infamous
famous. So one day he
as a man acquitted of the charge ofmurder but stll believed guilt by most
entered the king's
Americans. The angry mob tore off Ba                                              um's suit and was ready to lynch                                                palace and stung the
hir. After desperate  appeals, Ba                                                 um  finaly  convinced them to follow                                            little prince, who was in
bed. The prince awoke
hir to the circus, where he could verif his identit.
with loud cries. The
Once there, old Turer confirmed that this was all a practcal joke-he
king and his courtiers
hirself had spread the  rumor that Ba                                             um was Avery.  The  crowd dis­                                                  rushed in to see what
persed, but Ba                                                                    um,  who had nearly been killed, was  not amused.  He                           had happened. The
prince was yelling as
wated to know what could have induced his boss to play such a tic. "My
the wasp stung hir
dear Mr. Barum," Turer replied, "it was all for our good. Remember, all
again and again. The
we need to ensure success is notoriety." And indeed everyone in town was          courtiers tried to catch
the wasp, and each in
tking about the joke, ad the circus was packed that night and every night
turn was stung. The
it stayed in Annapolis. Ba                                                        um had lea                                                                      ed a lesson he would never forget.
whole royal household
Ba                                                                                um's first big venture of his own was the American Museum-a                                                          rushed in, the news
                                                                                  collecton  of curiosities,  located  in  New  York.  One  day  a  beggar  ap­                                        soon spread, and
proached Ba                                                                       um in the street. Instead of giving hir money, Ba                               um de­                               people flocked to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                       palace. The city was in
                                                                                  cided to employ hir. Taking hir back to the museum, he gave the man
                                                                                                                                                                                                       an uproar, all business
                                                                                  fve bricks and told hir to make a slow circuit of several blocks. At certan                                          suspended. Said the
                                                                                  points he was to lay down a brick on the sidewalk, always keeping one                                                wasp to itself before it
expired from its efforts,
brick in hand. On the retur jourey he was to replace eac brick on the
"A name without fare
street with the one he held. Meanwhile he was to reman serious of counte­
is like fire without
nance and to aswer no questions. Once back at the museum, he was to               flame. There is nothing
enter, walk around inside, then leave through the back door and make the          like attracting notice at
any cost. "
same bricklaying circuit again.
INDIAN FABLE
On the man's first walk through the steets, severa hundred people
watched  his   mysterious  movements.   By  his   fourth   circuit,   onlookers
swarmed around hir, debatng what he was doing. Every tme he entered
the museum he was followed by people who bought tickets to keep watch­
ing hir. Many of them were distacted by the museum's collections, and
stayed inside. By the end of the first day, the brick man had drawn over a
LAW 6                                                                             45

thousand people into the museum. A few days later the police ordered hir
to cease and desist from his walks-the crowds were blocking taffic. The
Even ,,hen Fm miled
bricklaying stopped but thousads of New Yorkers had entered te mu­
al, I Rel my i"ola or
reflOlVfl.                                                                   seum, and many of those had become P. T Baum converts.
PWI() ARErNO,                                                                Baum would put a bad of musicians on a balcony overlooking the
14'-1 550
FREE MUSIC FOR THE MIL                                                       IONS.                                                                         street, beneath a huge banner proclaiming
What generosity, New Yorkers thought, and they flocked to hea the fee
concerts. But Baum took pains to hire the worst musicians he could find,
ad soon aer the band struck up, people would hurry to buy tckets to the
museum, where tey would be out of earshot of the band's noise, and of
the booing of the crowd.
One of the first oddites Baum toured around the county was Joice
Heth, a woma he clamed was 161 years old, and whom he advertsed as a
A work Ihal was VOlllll­
slave who  had once been George Washington's nurse. Aer several
larily presenl<d [0 a
months the crowds began to dwindle, so Baum sent a anonymous letter
prinee was hound to
secm in some way                                                             to the papers, claiming that Heth was a clever fraud. joice Heth," he
special. The artisl                                                          wrote, "is not a human being but an automaton, made up of whalebone,
himself miRhl also try
india-rubber, and numberless springs." Those who had not botered to see
10 atlract the attenlion
her before were immediately curious, and those who had already seen her
0.1' the cOllrl throuRh his
hehaviollr, In Vasari's                                                      paid to see her again, to find out whether the rumor that she was a robot
judRmenl Sodoma was
was tue.
"weil known hoth for
In 1842, Baum purchased the cacass of what was purported to be a
his pen,'ollal eccentrlci­
ties am/ for his repllla­                                                    mermad. This creature resembled a monkey with the body of a fish, but
tion as a Rood painter. "                                                    the head ad body were perfecty joined-it was tuly a wonder. Aer
Because Pope I"eo X
some research Baum discovered that the creature had been expertly put
"found pleasure in
together in Japa, where te hoax had caused quite a str.
such stranRe, hare­
hrained individuals, "                                                       He nevertheless plated articles in newspapers around the county
he made SOl/oma a                                                            claiming the capture of a mermaid in the Fiji Islands. He also sent the pa­
krtiRhl, callsinR the
pers woodcut prints ofpaintngs showing mermaids. By the time he showed
artist 10 RO completelv
the specimen in his museum, a natona debate had been sparked over the
out ofhis mind. Van
Mander found it odd                                                          existence of these mythical creatures. A few months before Baum's cam­
Ihal the produCs of                                                          paign, no one had cared or even known about mermaidsj now everyone
Corelis Kelel's experi­
was talking about them as if they were real. Crowds flocked in record num­
ments in mouth and
bers to see the Fiji Mermad, and to hear debates on the subject.
fool paintillR were
hOURht hy notable                                                            A few years later, Baum toured Europe with General Tom Thumb, a
persons "hecallse of                                                         five-yea-old dwarf fom Connectcut whom Baum claimed was an
their oddity, " yet Ketel
eleven-year-old English boy, and whom he had traned to do many re­
was only addinR a vari­
markable acts. During this tour Baum's name attracted such attention
ation to similar experi­
ments hy Titian, URO                                                         that Queen Victoria, that paragon of sobriety, requested a private audience
da Carpi ami I'alma                                                          with hir and his talented dwaf at Bucingham Palace. The English press
Giovane, who, iccord-
may have ridiculed Bamum, but Victoria was royally entertained by hir,
inR (0 Boschini [ainted
and respected hir ever ater.
with their finRers
"hecause (hey wished
to imitate the method                                                        Interpretation
1/sed hy the SuprCllJe
Baum understood the fndaental tuth  about attracting attenton:
Creator. " ValJ Mander
Once people's eyes are on you, you have a special legitimacy. For Baum,
46                                                                           LAW 6

creating interest meant creating a crowd; as he later wrote, "Every crowd       reports Ihal Cossaerl
allraeled Ihe alIenIion
ha a silver lining. " And crowds tend to act in conjuncton. If one person
o[ Emperor Chartes V
stops to see your beggaman laying bricks in te street, more will do the
by wearing a [anlaslic
sa                                                                              e. They will gather like dust bunnies. Then, given a gentle push, they       paper coslume. In
                                                                                will enter your museum or watch your show. To   create a crowd you have to   doing so he was adopl­
ing Ihe laclies IIsed by
do something different and odd. Any kind of curiosity will serve the pur­
Dinoerales, who, in
pose, for crowds are magnetcally attracted by the unusua and inexplica­
order 10 gain aecess to
                                                                                ble. And once you have their attenton, never let it go. If it veers toward   A lexander Ihe Greal. is
other people, it does so at your expense. B                                     aum would ruthlessly suck at­                                                said 10 have appearet
disguised as Ihe naked
tention from his competitors, kowing what a valuable commodity it iso
Hereules when Ihe
At the beginning of your rise to the top, then, spend all your energy on
monarch was silling in
attracting attenton. Most important: The qualt of the attention is irrele­      judgmenl.
vant. No matter how badly his shows were reviewed, or how slanderously          THE COURT ARTIST,
M ARTIN WARNKE.
personal were the attacks on his hoaxes, Ba                                     um would never complain. If
1993
a newspaper critic reviled hir pa                                               cularly badly, in fact, he made sure to
invite the man to an opening ad to give hir the best seat in the house. He
would even write anonymous attacks on his own work, just to keep his
name in the papers. From Ba                                                     um's vatage, attention-whether negatve
or positive-was the main ingredient of his success. The worst fate in the
world for a man who yea                                                         s f                                                                          ae, glory, ad, of course, power is to be
ignored.
I the courtier happens to engage in arms in some public spectacle
such as jousting . . . he will ensure that the horse he has is beautifully
caparisoned, that he himself is suitably attired, with apprprate
mottoes and ingenious devices to attrct the ees 0/ the onlookers
in his direction as surely as the lodestone attracts iron.
Raidassare Castiglione, 1478-1529
KEYS TO POWER
Buring more brightly than those aound you is a skill that no one is bor
wth. You have to  tam to attact attention, "as surely as the lodestone at­
tacts iron." At the start of your career, you must attach your na               e and rep­
utation to a quality, an image, that sets you apart from other people. This
image can be something like a characteristc style of dress, or a personality
quirk that amuses people ad gets talked about. Once the image is estab­
lished, you have an appearance, a place in the sky for your star.
It is  a common mistake to  imagine that  this  peculiar appeaance of
yours  should not be  controversial,  that  to  be  attacked is  somehow bad.
Nothing could be frther from the tuth. To   avoid being a flash in the pan,
and having your notoriety eclipsed by another, you must not discriminate
between different types of attention; in the end, every kind will work in
your favor.  Barum, we have  seen,  welcomed personal attacks  and feIt
no need to defend hirself. He deliberately courted the image of being a
humbug.
LAW 6                                                                           47

The court of Louis XIV contained many talented writers, artsts, great
beauties, and men and women of impeccable virtue, but no one was more
talked about than the singular Duc de Lauzun. The duke was short, almost
dwarfish, ad he was prone to the most insolent kinds of behavior-he
slept with the king's mistress, ad openly insulted not only other courters
but the king hirself. Louis, however, was so beguiled by the duke's eccen­
ticities that he could not bear his absences from the court. It was simple:
The stangeness of the duke's chaacter attacted attention. Once people
were entralled by hir, they wated hir around at ay cost.
Society craves larger-tan-life figures, people who stand above the
general mediocrity. Never be afaid, then, of te qualites that set you apart
and draw attention to you. Court contoversy, even scandal. It is better to
be attacked, even slandered, than ignored. All professions are ruled by this
law, and all professionals must have a bit of the showman about them.
The great scientst Thomas Edison knew that to rase money he had to
remain in the public eye at any cost. Almost as importat as the inventons
themselves was how he presented them to the public and courted attention.
Edison would design visually dazzling experiments to display his dis­
coveries with electricity. He would talk of fture inventions that seemed
fatastc  at the  time-robots,  and  machines  that  could  photograph
thought-and that he had no intention of wasting his energy on, but that
made the public talk about hir. He did everything he could to make sure
that he received more attention than his great riyal Nikola Tesla, who may
actually have been more brilliant than he was but whose name was far less
known. In 1915, it was rumored that Edison ad Tesla would be joint recip­
ients of that year's Nobel Prize in physics. The prize was eventually given to
a pair of English physicists; only later was it discovered that the prize com­
mittee had actualy approached Edison, but he had tumed them down, re­
fsing to shae the prize with Tesla. By that time his fame was more seeure
tha Tesla's, and he thought it better to refse the honor than to allow his
riyal the attenton that would have come even fom shaing the prize.
If you find yourself i a lowly positon that offers little opportunity for
you to draw attenton, an effective tick is to attack the most visible, most
famous, most powerfl person you can find. When Pieto Aretino, a young
Roman servant boy of the early sixteenth century, wanted to get attention
as a writer of verses, he decided to publish a series of satrical poems ridi­
culing the pope and his affection for a pet elephant. The attac put Aretno
in the public eye immediately. A slanderous attack on a person in a posi­
tion of power would have a similar effect. Remember, however, to use such
tactics sparingly aer you have te public's attention, when the act can
wea thin.
Once in the limelight you must constantly renew it by adaptng and
varying your method of courtng attenton. If you don't, the public will
grow tred, will take you for granted, and will move on to a newer star. The
game requires constant vigilance and creatvity. Pablo Picasso never al­
lowed hirself to fade into the background; if his name became too at-
48                                                                               LAW 6

tached to a partcular style, he would deliberately upset the public with a
new series of pantings that went aganst all expectatons. Better to create
something ugly ad disturbing, he believed, tan to let viewers grow too fa­
miliar with his work. Understad: People feel superior to te person whose
actons they can predict. If you show them who is in contol by playing
aaint their expectations, you both gain their respect ad tghten your hold
on their fleetng attention.
I m age :
The Limelight. The
actor who steps into this bril­
liant light attains a heightened
presence. All eyes are on hir. There
is room for only one actor at a time in
the limelight's narrow beam; do wh at­
ever it takes to make yourself its focus.
Make your gestures so large, amus­
ing, and scandalous that the
light stays on you while the
other ac tors are left in
the  shadows.
Authority: Be ostentatious and
be seen                                                                      What is not seen is
as though it did not exist                                                   It
was light that first caused all cre­
ation to shine forth. Display fills
up many blanks, covers up defi­
ciencies, and gives  everything
a second life, especially when it
is  backed  by  genuine  merit.
(Baltasar  Graciän,                                                          1601-1658)
LAW 6                                                                        49

PART I I :  C REATE AN AI R OF MYSTERY
In a world growing increasingly banal and familiar what seems enig­
matic instantly drws attention. Nee make it too clar what you are
doing or about to do. Do not show all your cards. An air of mystery height­
ens your presence; it also creates anticipation-                                eryone will be watching
you to see what happens next. Use myster to beguile, seduce, eeften.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Beginning in 1905, rumors started to spread troughout Paris of a young
Oriental girl who danced in a private hore, wrapped in veils that she grad­
ually discarded. A local jouralist who had seen her dancing reported that
"a woma from the Far East had come to Europe laden with perfme and
jewels, to intoduce some of the richness of the Oriental colour and life into
the satiated society of European cites." Soon everyone knew the dancer's
name: Mata Hari.
Early that year, in the winter, small and select audiences would gather
in a salon filled with Indian statues ad other relics while an orchestra
played music inspired by Hindu and Javanese melodies. Mter keeping the
audience waitng and wondering, Mata Hai would suddenly appear, in a
startling costume: a white cotton brassiere coyered with Indian-type jewels;
jeweled bands at the waist supporting a sarong that revealed as much as it
conceaed; bracelets up the arms. Then Mata Hari would dance, in a style
no one in France had seen before, her whole body swaying as if she were in
a trance. She told her excited and curious audience that her dances told
stories fom Indian mythology and Javanese folktaes. Soon the crea of
Paris, and ambassadors from far-off lands, were competing for invitatons
to the salon, where it was rumored that Mata Hai was actualy performing
sacred dances in the nude.
The public wanted to know more about her. She told jouraists tat
she was actually Dutch in origin, but had grown up on the island ofJava.
She would also talk about tme spent in India, how she had leamed sacred
Hindu dances there, ad how Indian women "ca shoot staight, ride
horseback, ad are capable of doing logaritms ad talk philosophy." By
the summer of 1905, although few Parisians had actually seen Mata Hari
dance, her name was on everyone's lips.
As Mata Hari gave more interviews, the story of her origins kept
changing: She had grown up in India, her grandmother was the daughter
of a Javanese princess, she had lived on the island of Sumatra where she
had spent her time "horsebac riding, gun in hand, and risking her life."
No one knew anything certain about her, but jouralists did not mind these
changes in her biography. They compared her to an India goddess, a
creature from the pages of Baudelairewhatever their imaginaton wated
to see in this mysterious woma fom the East.
In August of 1905, Mata Hai performed for te first tme in public.
50                                                                              LAW 6

Crowds thronging to see her on opening night caused a riot. She had now
become a cult figure,  spawning many imitatons.  One  reviewer wrote,
"Mata Hari personifies all te poety of India, its mysticism, its voluptuous­
ness, its hypnotizing cham." Another noted, "If India possesses suc unex­
pected treasures, then  all Frenchmen will emigrate  to  the  shores of the
Ganges."
Soon the fame of Mata Hai and her sacred Indian dances spread be­
yond Pais. She was invited to Berlin, Vienna, Milan. Over the next few
years she performed throughout Europe, mixed with the highest social cir­
ees, ad eamed a income that gave her a independence rarely enjoyed
by a woman of the period. Then, nea the end of World War I, she was ar­
rested in Frace, tied, convicted, ad finally executed as a Germa spy.
Only during the trial did the truth come out: Maa Hari was not fom Java
or India, had not grown up in the Orient, did not have a drop of Eastem
blood in her body.  Her real name was Margaretha Zelle,  and she came
fom the stolid northem province of Friesland, Holland.
Interpretation
When Margaretha Zelle arived in Paris, in  1904, she had half a franc in
her pocket. She was one of the thousads of beautfl young girls who
focked  to  Paris  every year,  taking  work  as  artsts'  models,  nightclub
dancers, or vaudeville performers at the Folies Bergere.                          M                                                         ter a few years
they would inevitably be replaced by younger girls, and would ofen end
up on the streets, tuming to prosttution, or else retuming to the town they
ca                                                                                e fom, older and chastened.
Zelle had higher                                                                  abitons. She had no dace experience and had
never performed in the theater, but as a young girl she had taveled with
her family  and had witessed  loca  dances in Java and  Sumata.  Zelle
eIealy understood that what was important in her act was not the dance it­
self, or even her face or figure, but her ability to create an air of mystery
about herself. The mystery she created lay not just in her dancing, or her
costumes, or the stories she would tell, or her endless lies about her origins;
it   lay in an at                                                                 osphere enveloping everyting she did. There was nothing
you could say for sure about her-she was always chaging, always sur­
prising her audience with new costumes, new dances, new stories. This air
ofmystery lef the public always wantng to know more, always wondering
about her next move. Mata Hari was no more beautifl tha many of the
other young girls who came to Paris, ad she was not a partcularly good
dancer. What separated her fom the mass, what attacted and held the
public's attenton and  made her famous and wealthy, was her mystery.
People are enthralled by mystery; because it invites  constant interpreta­
ton, they never tre of it. The mysterious canot be grasped. And what
canot be seized ad consumed creates power.
LAW 6                                                                             51
r

KEYS TO POWER
In the  past,  the  world was  filled with  the  terrifing and unknowable­
diseases, disasters, capricious despots, the mystery of death itself. What we
could not understand we reimagined as myts and spirits. Over the cen­
turies, though, we have managed, through science and reason, to illumi­
nate the darkness; what was mysterious and forbidding has grown familiar
and comfortable. Yet this light has a price: in a world that is ever more
banal, that ha had its mystery ad myth squeezed out of it, we secretly
crave  enigmas,   people  or  things  that  cannot  be  instantly  interpreted,
seized, and consumed.
That is the power of te mysterious : It invites layers of interpretaton,
excites our imaginaton, seduces us into believing that it conceals some­
thing marvelous. The world has become so familiar and its inhabitants so
predictable that what wraps itself in mystery will almost always draw the
limelight to it and mae us watch it.
Do not imagine that to create a air of mystery you have to be grad
and awe-inspiring. Mystery that is woven into your day-to-day demeanor,
and is subtle, has that much more power to fascinate ad attract attention.
Remember: Most people are upfont, can be read like an open book, take
little care to control their words or image, ad are hopelessly predictable.
By simply holding back, keeping silent, occasionaly uttering ambiguous
phrases, deliberately appearing inconsistent, and acting odd in the subtlest
of ways, you will emanate an aura of mystery. The people around you will
then magnif that aura by constatly tying to interpret you.
Both artists and con                                                              asts understand the vital link between being
mysterious and attactng interest. Count Victor Lustig, the aistocrat of
swindlers, played te game to perfecton. He was aways doing things that
were different, or seemed to make no sense. He would show up at the best
hotels in a limo driven by a Japanese chauffeur; no one had ever seen a
Japaese chauffeur before, so this seemed exotc and stange. Lustg would
dress in the most expensive clothing, but always with something-a meda,
a flower, a ambad-out of place, at least in conventona terms. This
was seen not as tasteless but as odd and intiguing. In hotels he would be
seen receiving telegrams at al hours, one afer the other, brought to hir by
his Japanese chauffeur-telegrams he would tea up  with utter noncha­
lace. (In fact they were fakes, completely blank.) He would sit alone in the
dining room, reading a lage and impressive-Iooking book, smiling at peo­
pIe yet remaining aloof.  Witin  a few days, of course, the entre hotel
would be abuzz with interest in tis strage man.
A this attention allowed Lustg to lure  sucers in with ease.  They
would beg for his confidence and his company. Everyone wanted to be
seen wit this mysterious aristocrat. And in the presence of tis distractng
enigma, they wouldn't even notce that they were being robbed blind.
An air of mystery can mae te mediocre appear intelligent and pro­
found. It made Mata Hari, a woman of average appearance and intelli­
gence, seem like a goddess, and her dancing divinely inspired. An air of
52                                                                                LAW 6

mystery about an                                                                   ast maes his or her artwork immediately more intrigu­
ing, a trick Marcel Duchamp played to great effect. It is all very easy to
do-say little about your work, tease and titllate with alluring, even contra­
dictory comments, then stand back and let others t to mae sense of it all.
Mysterious people put others in a kind of inferior position-that of t­
ing to figure them out. To   degrees that they can control, they also elicit the
fear surrounding anything uncertain or unknown. All great leaders know
that an aura of mystery draws attenton to them and creates an intmidang
presence.  Mao  Tse-tung,  for  example,  cleverly  cultivated  an  enigmatc
image; he had no worries about seeming inconsistent or contradictng him­
self-the very contradictoriness of his actons ad words meant that he a­
ways had the upper hand. No one, not even his own wife, ever feIt they
understood hir, and he therefore seemed larger than life. This also meant
that the public paid constant attention to hir, ever anxious to witness his
next move.
If your social positon prevents you fom completely wrapping your
actions in mystery, you must at least lear to make yourself less obvious.
Every now and then, act in a way that does not mesh with other people's
percepton of you. This way you keep those around you on the defensive,
elicitng the kind of attenton that makes you powerful. Done right, the cre­
ation of enigma can also draw the kind of attention that stikes terror into
your enemy.
During the Second Punic War  (219-202 B.C.), the great Carthaginia
genera Hannibal was wreaking havoc in his march on Rome. Hanibal
was known for his cleveress and duplicity.
Under his leadership Cathage's army, though smaller than those  of
the  Romans,  had  constantly  outmaneuvered  them.   On   one  occasion,
though, Hannibal's scouts made a horrible blunder, leading his troops into
a mashy terrain with the sea at their back. The Roman army blocked the
mountain passes that led inland,  ad its general, Fabius, was ecstatic-at
last he had Hannibal trapped. Postng his best senties on the passes, he
worked on a plan to destroy Hannibal's forces. But i the middle of the
night, the sentries looked down to see a mysterious sight: A huge proces­
sion of lights was heading up the mountain. Thousands and thousands of
lights. If tis was Hanibal's army, it had suddenly grown a hundredfold.
The senties argued heatedly about what this could mean: Reinforce­
ments from the sea? Troops that had been hidden in the area? Ghosts? No
exlanaton made sense.
As they watched, fires broke out all over the mountain, and a horrible
noise drifed up to them fom below, like the blowing of a million hors.
Demons, they thought. The sentries, the bravest and most sensible in the
Roman army, fled their posts in a panic.
By the next day, Hannibal had escaped from the marshland. What was
his trick? Had he really cOIured up demons? Actually what he had done
was order bundles of twigs to be fastened to the hors of the thousands of
oxen that taveled with his troops as beasts of burden. The twigs were then
LAW 6                                                                              53

lit, giving the impression of the torches of a vast army heading up the
mountain. When the fla                                                          es bured down to the oxen's skin, they stam­
peded in all directons, bellowing like mad and settng fires all  over the
mountainside. The key to this  device's success was not the torches, the
fires, or the noises in themselves, however, but the fact that Hanniba had
created a puzzle that captivated the senties' attenton and gradually terri­
fied them. From the mountaintop there was no way to explain this bizare
sight. If the senties could have explained it they would have stayed at their
posts.
If you find yourself trapped, corered, and on the defensive in some
situation, ty a simple experiment: Do something that canot be easily ex­
plained or interpreted. Choose a simple action, but carry it out in a way
that unsettles your  opponent, a way with many possible interpretatons,
making your intentons obscure. Don't just be unpredictable (although this
tactc too can be successfl-see Law 17) ; like Hanibal, create a scene that
cannot be read. There will seem to be no method to your madness, no
rhyme or reason, no single explanation. If you do this right, you will in­
spire fear and tembling and the sentries will abandon their posts. Call it
the "feigned madness of Ha                                                      let" tactic, for Ha                                            et uses it to great effect in
Shakespeare's play, figtening his stepfather Claudius through the mys­
tery of his behavior. The mysterious makes your forces seem lager, your
power more terrifing.
Image: The Dance of
the  Veils-the  veils
envelop the dancer.
What  they  reveal
causes   excitement.
What they conceal
heightens interest. The
essence of mystery.
Authority: If you do not declare yourself immediately, you arouse
expectation                                                                     Mi a litde mystery with everything, and the very
mystery stirs up veneration. And when you explain, be not too ex­
plicit                                                                          In this manner you imitate the Divine way when you
                                                                                cause men to wonder and watch. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
54                                                                              LAW 6

REVERSAL
In the beginning of your rise to the top, you must attraet attenton at all
cost, but as you rise higher you must constatly adapt. Never wea the pub­
lic out with the same tactc. A air of mystery works wonders for those who
need to develop an aura of power and get themselves noticed, but it must
seem measured and under contol. Mata Hari went too far with her fabri­
catons; athough the accusaton that she was a spy was false, at the time it
was a reasonable presumption because all her lies made her seem suspi­
cious and nefarious. Do not let your air of mystery be slowly tansformed
into a reputation for deceit. The mystery you create must seem a game,
playfl and unthreatening. Recognize when it goes too far, and puH back.
There are times when the  need for attention must be deferred, ad
when scanda and notoriety ae the last things you want to create. The at­
tention you attraet must never offend or calenge the reputation of those
above you-not, at any rate, if they are secure. You will seem not only pal­
t but desperate by comparison. There is an                                      a                        to knowing when to draw
notce and when to withdraw.
Lola Montez was one of the great practitioners of the                           a                        of attacting
attention.  She  managed to  rise fom a middle-class lrish background to
being the lover of Franz Liszt and then the mistress and political adviser of
King Ludwig of Bavaria. In her later yeas,  though, she lost her sense of
proportion.
In London in 1850 there was to be a performance of Shakespeare's
Macbeth featuring te greatest actor of the tme, Charles John Kean. Every­
one of consequence in English society was to be there; it was rumored that
even Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were to make a public appearance.
The custom of the period demanded that everyone be seated before the
queen arrived. So the audience got there a little early, and when the queen
entered her royal box, they observed the conventon of standing up and
applauding her. The royal couple waited, then bowed. Everyone sat down
and the lights were dimmed. Then, suddenly, all eyes tured to a box op­
posite Queen Victoria's: A woman appeared fom the shadows, taking her
seat later than the queen. It was Lola Montez. She wore a diamond tara on
her dark hair and a long fr coat over her shoulders. People whispered in
aazement as the ermine cloak was dropped to reveal a low-necked gown
of crimson velvet. By turing their heads, the audience could see that the
royal  couple deliberately avoided looking at Lola's  box.  They foHowed
Victoria's example, and for the rest of the evening Lola Montez was ig­
nored.                                                                          M                        ter that evening no one in fashionable society daed to be seen
with her. A her magnetc powers were reversed. People would flee her
sight. Her fture in England was finished.
Never appear overly greedy for attenton, then, for it signals insecurity,
and insecurity drives power away. Understand that there are tmes when it
is not in your interest to be the center of attention.                          Wen in the presence of
a king or queen, for instace, or the equivalent thereof, bow and retea to
the shadows; never compete.
LAW 6                                                                           55

LAW
7
GET OTHERS TO D O  THE
WORK FOR YOU, BUT
ALWAYS TAKE THE CREDIT
JUDGMENT
Use the wisdom, knowldge, and legwork of other peol
to further your own cause. Not only will such assistance
save you valuabl time and energ,  it will give you a
godlike aura of   efficienc and speed. In the end your
helpers will be forgotten and you will be remembered.
Never do yoursel what others can dofor you.
56

TRAN SGRESSION AND O B S E RVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1883 a young Serbian scientst named Nikola Tesla wa working for the
THE TORTOISE. THE
European division of te Continenta Edison Company. He was a brilliant
ELEPIIA\T.  A"D TIIE
inventor, and Charles Batchelor, a plat manager and a persona fiend of        HIPPOPOTA \I S
Thomas Edison, persuaded him he should seek his fortune in America, giv­
One day the tortoise
ing hir a letter of introducton to Edison hirself. So bega a life of woe      met the elephant, who
and tibulaton that lated untl Tesla's death.                                  trumpeted, "Out of my
way, you weakling-
When Tesla met Edison in New York, the faous inventor hired him
I might step on you!"
on te spot. Tesla worked eighteen-hour days, finding ways to improve the
The tortoise was not
primitive Edison dynamos. Finaly he offered to redesign them completely.      afraid and stayed
To   Edison this seemed a monumenta task that could last years witout         where he was, so the
elephant stepped on
paying off, but he told Tesla, "There's fif thousad dollars in it for you-i
him, but could not
you ca do it." Tesla labored day and night on the project ad afer only a
crush him. "Da not
year he produced a greatly improved version of the dynamo, complete           boast, Mr. Elephant, I
am as strang as you
with automate contols. He went to Edison to break the good news and re­
are!" said the tortoise,
ceive his $50,000. Edison was pleased with the improvement, for whic he
but the elephant just
and his compay would tae credit, but when it came to the issue of the
laughed. So the tortoise
money he told the young Serb, "Tesla, you don't understad our American        asked him to come
to his hill the next
humor!," and offered a smal raise instead.
morning.
Tesla's obsession was to create an altematng-current system (AC) of
The next day, before
electicity. Edison believed in the direct-current system (DC), and not only   sunrise, the tortoise ran
refsed to support Tesla's research but later did al he could to sabotage      down the hili to the
hm. Tesla tumed to the great Pittsburgh magnate George Westinghouse,          river, where he met the
                                                                              hippopotamus, who
who had stted his own electicity company. Westinghouse completely
                                                                              was just on his way
fnded Tesla's research ad offered hir a generous royaty agreement on          back into the water
fture profits. The AC system Tesla developed is stll the stadard today­       after his nocturnal
feeding. "Mr Hippo!
but afer patents were filed in his name, other scientists came forwad to
Shall we have a tug·ol
tke credit for te invention, claiming that tey had laid the groundwork
war? I bet I'm as
for hir. His nae was lost in the shuffle, and te public came to associate     strang as you are!"
te inventon with Westnghouse hirself.                                         said the tortoise. The
hippopotamus laughed
A year  later,  Westnghouse  was  caught in  a takeover  bid  from
at this ridiculous idea,
J. Pierpont Morgan, who made hir rescind the generous royalty contact
but agreed. The tortoise
he had signed with Tesla. Westinghouse explaned to the scientst tat his       produced a lang rope
company would not survive i it had to pay hir his fll royaltes; he per­       and told the hippo to
hold it in his mouth
suaded Tesla to accept a buyout of his patents for $216,000-a large sum,
until the tortoise
no doubt, but far less than te $ 12 million they were worth at the tme. The
shouted "Hey!"
finaciers had divested Tesla of the riches, the patents, and essentally the   Then the tortoise ran
credit for the greatest inventon of his career.                               back up the hili where
he found the elephant,
The name of Guglielmo Maconi is forever linked with the inventon
who was getting impa·
of radio. But few know tat in producing his invention-he broadcast a sig­
tient. He gave the
na across the English Channel in 1899-Marconi made use of a patent            elephant the other end
Tesla had filed in 1897, and that his work depended on Tesla's reseach.       ofthe rope and said,
"When I say 'Hey!'
Once again Tesla received no money and no credit. Tesla invented an in­
pull, andyou'11 see
duction motor as well as the AC power system, and he is te real "father of    which of us is the
radio." Yet none of these discoveries bear his name. As an old ma, he         strongest." Then he ran
lived in poverty.                                                             halfay back down the
LAW 7                                                                         57

hili, 10 a place where he                                                    In 1917, during his later impoverished years, Tesla was told he was to
('ouldn 'I he seen, ami
receive te Edison Medal of the American Insttute of Electical Engineers.
ShO/lled, "Hey ! "  The
He tumed the medal down. "You propose," he said, "to honor me with a
elephant and Ihe
hippopotamus pulled                                                          medal which I could pin upon my coat and strut for a vain hOUf before the
and pulled, hul neirher
members of your Institute. You would decorate my body and continue to
{'()Id hudge Ihe
let stave, for failure to supply recogniton, my mind and its creatve prod­
olher  lhey were oI
eq/lal strengllz. They                                                       ucts, which have supplied the foundaton upon which te major porton of
hoth agreed thaI Ihe                                                         your Insttute exists."
{orloise was os slrong
as Ihey were.
Interpretation
Never do wh al olhers
can do for you. The lor­                                                     Many harbor the illusion that science, dealing with facts as it does, is be­
loise leI olhers do Ihe                                                      yond the petty rivalries that touble the rest of te world. Nikola Tesla was
work for him while he
one of those. He believed  science  had nothing to  do wit  politics,  ad
goI Ihe erettil.
claimed not to care for fa                                                   e and rices, As he grew older, though, this ru­
ZAIREAN rABU·
ined his scientific work. Not associated with any partcular discovery, he
could attact no investors to his many ideas. While he pondered great in­
ventions for te fture, others  stole te patents he had aready developed
ad got the glory for themselves.
He wanted to do everything on his own, but merely exhausted and im­
poverished hirself in the process.
To   he sure, iI the hunler                                                  Edison was Tesla's pola opposite. He wasn't actually much of a scien­
relies on Ihe securily of
tific thinker or inventor; he once said that he had no need to be a mathe­
Ihe (arriage, IIlilizes Ihe
matician  because  he  could  always  hire   one.  That  was                 Eison's  main
legs of Ihe six horses,
ami makes Wang Liang                                                         method. He was really a businessman and publicist, spottng the trends and
hold Iheir reins, Ihen he                                                    the opportunites that were out there, then hiring the best in the field to do
will nol lire himself
the work for him. If he had to he would steal fom his competitors. Yet his
and will find il easy 1
name is much better known tha Tesla's, ad is associated with more in­
overlake swill animals.
N()lV supposing he                                                           ventons.
discarded Ihe advan­                                                                                                                                         The lesson is twofold: First, te credit for an inventon or creaton is as
lage o/Ihe carriage,
                                                                                                                                                             important, if not more important, tan the inventon itself. You must seeUfe
gave up Ihe IIseflll legs
of Ihe 11Orse.' and the                                                                                                                                      the credit for YOUfseif and keep others from stealing it away, or fom piggy­
skill of Wang Liang,                                                                                                                                         backing on YOUf had work. To   accomplish tis you must always be vigilant
and alighled 10 run                                                                                                                                          and ruthless, keeping YOUf creation quiet until you can be SUfe there are no
afier Ihe animal,I', then
                                                                                                                                                             vultures circling overhead. Second, leam to take advatage of other peo­
even lllOUgh his legs
were as quick w Lou                                                                                                                                          ple's work to frter YOUf own cause. Time is precious and life is short. If
Chi's, he wOllld nol he                                                      you try to do it all on YOUf own, you                                           r                                                                              yourself ragged, waste energy, and
in lime t overlake rhe
bum yourself out. It is far better to  conserve your forces, pounce on the
animals. In fact, if'good
work others have done, and find a way to make it YOUf own.
hor.\'(,,\' alld strong
carriages arc laken info
use, Ihen mere hond­                                                         Everybody steals in commerce and industry.
nU!fl and !ulldwolnen
I've stolen a lot mysel
will be good enough 10
But I know how to steal.
calch rhe animals.
Thomas Edison, 1 84 7-1 931
HA)-f<EI-TZL,
CHINESr, PI-IILOSOPHLR,
TI!lR!) CENTllRY H.C,
58                                                                           LAW 7

KEYS TO POWER
The world o f  power has the dynamics o f  the jungle: There ae those who
1                                                                                  1                                                      1 1·   111 .1 ')   1   1   1   \
live by hunting and killing, and there are also vast numbers of creatures
A hen wll had !osl her
(hyenas, vultures)  who  live  off the  hunting of others.  These  latter,  less
sighl, und wo"  a('elf.\'­
imaginatve types are ofen incapable of doing the work that is essental for
(ol}u!d f() scratching up
te creaton of power. They understand ealy on, though, tat if they wait             Ihe carlh in sellrch oI
long enough, they can always find another animal to do the work for them.          fl)(!d, 1I1riwI/gh blind,
                                                                                   .lIi!! eol1linlled (()
Do not be nave: At this very moment, while you are slaving away on some
                                                                                   s('rurch lIH'llY 111os1 (lili­
project, tere are vultures cirding above trying to figure out a way to sur­        genl!V. Ur whal l/se "'lIS
vive and even thrive off your creativity. It is useless to complain about this,    it t() {he indusfrious
or to wear yourself ragged with bittemess, as Tesla did. Better to protect         !()(!!   Another sllllrp­
sighlcd 1/('11 wlw spllred
yourself and join the game. Once you have established a power base, be­
her leI/der f,'ci l/"" er
come a vulture yourself, and save yourself a lot of time ad energy.
lIIoved fi-o/ll her side,
Of the two poles of this game, one can be illustated by the example of             11m! mjoved, wilhol/I
scralching, Ihe fi-lIil oI
the explorer Vasco Nliez de Balboa. Balboa had a obsession-te dis­
Ihe olher's !abor. For 1I.'
covery of EI Dorado, a legenday city of vast riches.
oflen os Ihe Nil/d !zen
Early in the sixteenth century, after countless hardships and brushes              seraIch cd 1If! 1I !JlIr!ev­
with death, he found evidence of a great and wealthy empire to the south           cor, her ",alehfili
of Mexico, in present-day Peru. By conquering this empire, the Incan, ad           cOlnjJanioll dcvoured
il.
seizing its gold, he would make hirself the next Cortes. The problem was
FABL  S,
that even as he made this discovery, word of it spread among hundreds of           GOTTI IOLD L 'S<II\'( i,
other conquistadors. He did not understad that half the game was keeping           1 729- 1 7H I
it quiet, and careflly watching tose around hir. A few years afer he dis­
covered the location of the Incan empire, a soldier in his own army, Fran­
cisco Pizarro, helped to get hir beheaded for teason. Pizaro went on to
take what Balboa had spent so many years tying to find.
The other pole is that of the atst Peter Paul Rubens, who, late in his
career, found hirself deluged with requests for paintngs. He created a sys­
tem: In his large studio he employed dozens of outstanding painters, one
specializing in robes, another in backgrounds, ad so on. He created a vast
producton line in whic a lage number of canvases would be worked on
at    the same  time. When an  important dient visited the  studio,                Rbens
would shoo his hired painters out for the day.  While the dient watched
from a balcony, Rubens would work at an incredible pace, with unbeliev­
able energy. The dient would leave in awe of this prodigious man, who
could paint so many masterpieces in so short a tme.
This is the essence of the Law: Leam to get others to do the work for
you while you take the credit, and you appear to be of godlike stength and
power. If you think it important to do all the work yourself, you will never
get far, and you will suffer the fate of the Balboas and Teslas of the world.
Find people with the skills and creativity you lack. Either hire them, while
puttng your own na                                                                 e on top of theirs, or find a way to take their work
and make it your own. Their creativity thus becomes yours, and you seem
a genius to the world.
There is another applicaton of this law that does not require the para­
sitc use of your contemporaries' labor: Use the past, a vast storehouse of
LAW 7                                                                              59

knowledge and wisdom. Isaac Newton called this "standing on the shoul­
ders of giants." He meant that in making his discoveries he had built on the
achievements of others. A great part of his aura of genius, he knew, was at­
tibutable to his shrewd ability to mae te most of the insights of ancient,
medieval, and Renaissace scientists. Shakespeare borrowed plots, chaac­
terizatons, and even dialogue from Plutarch, aong other writers, for he
knew that nobody surpassed Plutarch in the writng of subtle psychology
and witty quotes. How many later writers have in their                         t       borrowed
from-plgiarizdShaespeae?
We   all know how few of today's politicians write their own speeches.
Their own words would not win them a single vote; teir eloquence and
wit, whatever there is of it, they owe to a speech writer. Oter people
do the work, tey take the credit. The upside of this is that it is a kind
of power tat is avalable to everyone. Lea to use the knowledge of the
past and you will look like a genius, even when you are really just a dever
borrower.
Writers who have delved into human nature, ancient masters of strat­
egy, historians of human stupidity ad folly, kings and queens who have
leaed the hard way how to hadle the burdens of power-their knowl­
edge is gathering dust, waiting for you to come ad stad on their shoul­
ders. Their wit ca be your wit, their skill can be your skill, and they will
never come around to tell people how unoriginal you really are. You ca
slog through life, making endless mistakes, wastng tme and energy trying
to do things from your own experience. Or you can use the armies of the
past. As Bismarck once said, "Fools say that they lea by experience. I
prefer to profit by oters' experience."
Image: The Vulture. Of all the creatures in
the jungle,  he  has  it  the  easiest.  The
hard work of others becomes his work;
their failure to survive becomes his
nourishment. Keep an eye on
the Vulture-while you are
hard at work, he is cir-
ding above. Do not
fighth join
hir.
Authority: There is much to be known, life is short, and life is not life
without knowledge.  It is therefore  an  excellent device to  acquire
knowledge from everybody. Thus, by the sweat of another's brow, you
win te reputation of being an orade. (Baltasar Graciän, 1601-1658)
60                                                                             LAW 7

REVERSAL
There are times when taking the credit for work that others have done is
not the wise course: If your power is not firmly enough established, you
will seem to be pushing people out of the limelight. To   be a brilliant ex­
ploiter of taent your position must be unshakable, or you will be accused
of decepton.
Be sure you know when lettng other people share the credit serves
your purpose. It is especially important to not be greedy when you have a
master above you. Pesident Richard Nixon's historie visit to the People's
RepubHc of China was originally his idea, but it might never have come off
but for the def diplomacy of Henry Kissinger. Nor would it have been           a
successfl without Kissinger's skills. Stll, when the tme came to take
credit, Kissinger adroitly let Nixon take the Hon's shae. Knowing that the
tth would come out later, he was carefl not to jeopadize his standing in
the short term by hogging the limelight. Kissinger played the game ex­
pertly: He took credit for the work of those below hir while graciously
giving credit for his own labors to those above. That is the way to play
the game.
LAW 7                                                                          61

LAW
8
MAKE OTHER PEOPLE
COME TO YOU-
USE BAIT IF NECESSARY
JUDGMENT
Men youforce the other person to act, you are the one in
contrl. It is always better to make your opponent come to
you, abandoning his own plans in the process. Lure him
withfabulous gains-then attack. You hold the cards.
62

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
At the Congress of Vienna in 1814, the major powers of Europe gathered to
carve up the remains of Napoleon's falen Empire. The city was fH of ga­
ety and the balls were the most splendid in memory. Hovering over the
proceedings, however, was the shadow of Napoleon hirself. Instead of
being executed or exiled far away, he had been sent to the island of Elba,
not far fom the coast of Italy.
Even imprisoned  on  an islad,  a man as  bold and creatve as
Napoleon Bonaparte made everyone nervous. The Austians plotted to kill
hir on Elba, but decided it was too risky. Alexader I, Russia's tempera­
mental czar, heightened the axiety by throwing a fit during the congress
when a part of Polad was denied him: "Beware, I shall loose the mon­
ster!" he threatened. Everyone knew he meant Napoleon. Of al the states­
men gathered in Vienna, only Talleyrand, Napoleon's former foreign
minister, seemed calm and unconcered. It was as if he knew something
the others did not.
Meanwhile, on the island of Elba, Napoleon's life was a mockery of his
previous glory. As Elba's "king," he had been allowed to form a court­
tere was a cook, a wardrobe mistess, an official piaist, and a handfl of
coutiers. All this was designed to humiliae Napoleon, and it seemed to
work.
Tat winter, however, there occurred a series of events so stange and
draatic they might have been scripted in a play. Elba was surrounded by
Brtish ships, their cannons covering all possible exit points. Yet somehow,
i broad daylight on 26 Februay 1815, a ship with nine hundred men on
boad picked up Napoleon and put to sea. The English gave chase but the
ship got away.  This  almost  impossible  escape  astonished the  public
throughout Europe, and terrified the statesmen at the Congress of Vienna.
Although it would have been saer to leave Europe, Napoleon not only
chose to retur to France, he rased the odds by marching on Paris wit a
ty                                                                             ay, in hopes of recapturing the throne. His strategy worked-people
of al classes threw themselves at his feet. A army under Marsha Ney sped
fom Pais to arrest hir, but when the soldiers saw their beloved former
leaer, they changed sides. Napoleon was declared emperor again. Volun­
teers swelled the ranks of his new army. Delirium swept the county. In Pais,
crowds went wild. The king who had replaced Napoleon fled the country.
For the next hundred days, Napoleon ruled France. Soon, however, the
gddiness subsided. Frace was bankrupt, its resources nearly exhausted,
ad there was little Napoleon could do about this. At the Battle of Waterloo,
i June of that year, he was finally defeated for good. This time his enemies
had leaed their lesson: They exiled hir to the barren islad of Saint He­
lena, off the west coast of Mrica. There he had no more hope of escape.
Interpretation
Only years later did the facts of Napoleon's dramatic escape fom Elba
come to light. Before he decided to attempt this bold move, visitors to his
cout had told hir that he was more popular in France than ever, and that
LAW 8                                                                          63

the county would embrace hir agan. One of these visitors was Austria's
General Koller, who convinced Napoleon that if he escaped, the Europea
powers, England included, would welcome him back into power. Napoleon
was tpped off tat the English would let hir go, and indeed his escape oc­
curred in te middle of the afteroon, in full view of English spyglasses.
What Napoleon did not know was that there was a man behind it al,
pulling the stings, and that this ma was his former minister, Talleyrand.
And Talleyrad was doing all this not to bring bac the glory days but to
crush Napoleon once and for all. Considering the emperor's ambition un­
setting to Europe's stability, he had tured aganst hir long ago. When
Napoleon was exiled to Elba, Talleyrad had protested. Napoleon should
be sent farther away, he argued, or Europe would never have peace. But
no one listened.
Instead of pushing his opinion, Taleyrad bided his tme. Working
quiety, he eventually won over Castereagh and Mettemich, the foreign
ministers of Englad and Austia.
Together these men baited Napoleon into escaping. Even Koller's visit,
to whisper the promise of glory in the exile's ear, was part of the plan. Like
a master  cardplayer,  Talleyrand  figured everything out in  advance.  He
knew Napoleon would fall into the tap he had set. He also foresaw tat
Napoleon would lead the country into a war, whic, given Frace's weak­
ened  conditon,  could only last a few months. One diplomat in Vienna,
who understood that Taleyrand was behind it al, said, "He has set the
house ablae in order to save it fom te plague. "
Wen I have laid bait for deer
I don 't shoot at the first doe that comes to snif
but rpait until the whole herd has gathered mund.
Dito von Bismarck, 1815-1898
KEYS TO POWER
How many tmes has this scenario played itself out in history: An aggres­
sive  leader initates a series of bold moves that begin by bringing hir
much power. Slowly, however, his power reaches a peak, and soon every­
thing turs against hir. His numerous enemies band together; trying to
maintain his power, he exhausts hirself going in tis directon and that,
ad inevitably he collapses. The reason for tis pater is that te aggres­
sive person is raely in fll contol. He cannot see more tha a couple of
moves ahead, cannot see the consequences of this bold move or that one.
Because he is constantly being forced to react to the moves of his ever­
growing host of enemies, and to the unforeseen consequences of his own
rash actions, his aggressive energy is tured against hir.
In te realm of power, you must ak yourself,   what is the point of chas­
ing here and there,                                                              tng to solve problems and defeat my enemies, if I
never feel in conto!? Why                                                        a                                                   I always having to react to events instead of
directng them? The answer is simple: Your idea of power is wrong. You
6   LAW 8

have mistaken aggressive action for effective action. And most ofen the
most effective action is to stay back, keep calm, and let others be fustated
by the traps you lay for them, playing for long-term power rater tan
quick victory.
Remember: The essence of power is the ability to keep te initiatve,
to get others to react to your moves, to keep YOUf opponent ad those
aound you on the defensive. When you make other people come to you,
you suddenly become the one controlling the situation. And the one who
has control has power. Two things must happen to place you in this posi­
tion: You yourself must lea to master YOUf emotons, and never to be in­
fuenced by anger; meanwhile, however, you must play on people's natura
tendency to react agrily when pushed and bated. In the long run, te
ability to make others come to you is a weapon far more powerfl than any
tool of aggression.
Study how Talleyrand, the master of the a performed this delicate
tick. First, he overcame the urge to try to convince his fellow statesmen
that they needed to banish Napoleon far away. It is only natural to want to
persuade people by pleading YOUf case, imposing YOUf will with words. But
this ofen turs against you. Few of Talleyrand's contemporaries believed
Napoleon was stll a threat, so that if he had spent a lot of energy tying to
convince them, he would only have made himself look foolish. Instead, he
held his tongue ad his emotons in check. Most important of all, he laid
Napoleon a sweet and irresistible tap. He knew the man's weakness, his
impetuosity, his need for glory and the love of te masses, and he played
all this to perfection. When Napoleon went for the bait, there was no dan­
ger that he might succeed and tur the tables on Talleyrand, who better
tan anyone knew France's depleted state. And even had Napoleon been
able to overcome these difficulties, the likelihood of bis success would have
been greater were he able to choose his time and place of action. By setting
the proper trap, Talleyrad took the tme and place into his own hads.
All of us have only so much energy, and there is a moment when OUf
energies are at their peak. When you make the other person come to you,
he wears himself out, wasting his energy on the trip. In the year 1905, Rus­
sia ad Japan were at war. The Japanese had only recently begun to mod­
emize their warships, so that the Russias had a stronger navy, but by
spreading false information the Japanese mashal Togo Heihachiro baited
te Russians into leaving their docks in the Batic Sea, making them believe
they could wipe out the Japanese fleet in one swif attack. The Russian fleet
could not reach Japan by the quickest route-through the Stait of Gibral­
t and then the Suez Canal into the Indian Ocean-because these were
controlled by the British, and Japan was an ally of Great Britain. They had
to go around the Cape of Good Hope, at the souther tip of Afica, adding
over more than six thousand miles to the voyage. Once the fleet passed the
Cape, the Japanese spread another false story: They were sailing to launc
a counterattack. So the Russians made the entire jourey to Japan on com­
bat alert. By the time they arrived, their seamen were tense, exhausted, and
overworked, while the Japanese had been waitng at their ease. Despite the
LAW 8                                                                           65

odds and their lack of experience in modem naval wafare, the Japanese
crushed the Russians.
One added benefit of maing the opponent come to you, as the Japa­
nese discovered with the Russians, is that it forces hir to operate in your
territory. Being on hostle ground will make hir nervous and often he will
rush his actions and make mistakes. For negotiatons or meetngs, it is al­
ways wise to lure others into your territory, or the territory of your choice.
You have your bearings, while tey see nothing familiar and ae subtly
placed on the defensive.
Manipulaton is a dangerous game. Once someone suspects he is
being manipulated, it becomes harder and harder to control hir. But
when you mae your opponent come to you, you create te illusion that he
is controlling the situaton. He does not feel the strings that pull hir, just as
Napoleon imagined that he hirself was te master of his daring escape and
retur to power.
Everyting depends on te sweetess of your bat. If your tap is at­
tractive enough, the turbulence of your enemies' emotions and desires will
blind them to reality. The greedier they become, the more they can be led
around.
The great nineteenth-century robber baron Daniel Drew was a master
at playing the stock market.                                                       Wen he wanted a partcular stoc to be
bought or sold, driving prices up or down, he raely resorted to the direct
approach. One of his ticks was to hurry through a exclusive club near
Wall Street, obviously on his way to the stock exchange, and to pull out his
customary red bandanna to wipe his perspiring brow. A slip of paper
would fall fom this bandana that he would pretend not to notice. The
club's members were always tying to foresee Drew's moves, and they
would pounce on the paper, which invariably seemed t contain an inside
tp on a stock. Word would spread, and members would buy or seIl the
stock in droves, playing perfecty into Drew's hads.
If you can get other people to dig their own graves, why sweat your­
self? Pickpockets work this to perfection. The key to picking a pocket is
knowing which pocket contains the wallet. Experienced pickpockets ofen
ply their trade in train statons and other places where there is a clearly
marked sign reading BEWARE OF PICKPOCKETS. Passersby seeing the sign in­
vaiably feel for their wallet to make sure it is still there. For the watching
pickpockets, this is like shootng fish in a barrel. Pickpockets have even
been known t place their own BEWARE  OF PICKPOCKETS signs to ensure
their success.
Wen you ae maing people come to you, it is sometimes better to let
them know you are forcing teir hand. You give up deception for overt ma­
nipulaton. The psychological ramifications are profound: The person who
makes others come to hir appears power, and demands respect.
Filippo Brunelleschi, the great Renaissance artist and architect, was a
great practtioner of the                                                           a                                      of making others come to hir as a sign of his
power. On one occasion he had been engaged to repar the dome of the
Santa Maria deI Fiore cathedra in Florence. The commission was impor-
66                                                                                 LAW 8

taut and prestigious. But when the city officials hired a second man,
Lorenzo Ghibert, to work with Brunelleschi, the great atst brooded in se­
cret. He knew that Ghibert had gotten the job through his connections,
and that he would do none of the work ad get half the credit. At a critical
moment of the constructon, then, Brunelleschi suddenly developed a mys­
terious illness. He had to stop work, but pointed out to city officials that
they had hired Ghibert, who should have been able to contnue the work
on his O                                                                        W                          .  Soon it became dear that Ghibert was useless ad the officials
cae begging to Brunelleschi. He ignored them, insisting that Ghibert
should fnish the project, until finally they realized the problem: They fired
Ghiberti.
By some mirade, Brunelleschi recovered within days. He did not have
to throw a tautrum or make a fool of hirself; he simply practced the art of
"making others come to you."
If on one occasion you make it a point of dignity that others must
come to you and you succeed, they will continue to do so even aer you
stop tying.
Image: The Honeyed
Bear  Trap. The bear hunter
does not chase his prey; a bear
that knows it is hunted is nearly
impossible to catch and is fero­
cious if cornered. Instead,  the
hunter  lays  traps  baited  with
honey.  He  does  not  exhaust
himself and risk his life in
pursuit He baits, then waits.
Authority:  Good  warriors  make  others
come to them, and do not go to others. This
is the principle of emptiness and fullness
of others and self. When you induce oppo­
nents to come to you, then their force is
always  empty;  as  long  as  you  do  not
go to them, your force is always full. Attack­
ing emptiness with fullness is like throwing
stones   on   eggs.                                                             (Zhang   Yu,   eleventh­
century commentator on  The Art of   War)
                                                                                                           LAW 8                                                              67

REVERSAL
Although it is generally the wiser policy to make others exhaust themselves
chasing you, there ae opposite cases where st                                 g suddenly and aggres­
sively at the enemy SO demoralizes hir tat his energies sink. Instead of
making oters come to you, you go to them, force the issue, take the lead.
Fast atack can be an awesome weapon, for it forces te other person t
react without te time to think or plan. With no tme t                         t                        people make
errors of judgment, and ae trown on te defensive. This tactc is the ob­
verse of watng and bating, but it serves the same fnction: You make
your enemy respond on your terms.
Men like Cesare Borgia and Napoleon used the element of speed to i­
timidate and contol. A rapid ad unforeseen move is terrifing and de­
moralizing. You must choose YOUf tactics depending on te situation. If
you have time on YOUf side, and know tat you ad your enemies are at
least at equal strength, ten deplete their strength by making them come to
you. If time is against YOU-yOUf enemies are weaer, and waiting will only
give them the chance to recover-give them no such chance. Strike quickly
and they have nowhere to go. As te boxer Joe Louis put it, "He can run,
but he ca't hide."
68                                                                            LAW 8

LAW
9
WIN THROU G H  YOUR
ACTIONS, NEVER
THROUGH ARGUMENT
JUDGMENT
Any momentar triumph you think you have gained
through argument is really a Prhic victory: The resent­
ment and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer
than any momentary change of opinion. It is much more
powerful to get others to agree with you thrugh your
actions, without saying a word. Demonstrate,  do not
explicate.
69

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In  131 B.C.,  te Roman consul Publius  Crassus Dives Mucianus, laying
1                                                                               1                                                                                11                                                                          ,I   I                                                                       1   \ "   I   Il
siege to the Greek town of Pergamus, found hirself in need of a battering
I I II                                                                          \ 1 I 1 1  I!
ram to force through the town's walls. He had seen a couple of hefty ship's
A vi; i('/" had servcd h is
masts in a shipyard in Athens a few days before, and he ordered that the
l}ws/er Iur ,\Ollll [hirty
.",curs lind H/lIS kl10wn                                                       larger of tese be sent to hir immediately. The military engineer in Athens
1I1l11 11dlllired flJr his                                                      who  received  the  order  feit  certin  tat  the  consul  really  wanted  the
loyally, lrulh/ii/IICSS,
smaler of the masts. He agued endlessly with the soldiers who delivered
and devotion to Got/.
the request: The smaller mast, he told them, was much better suited to the
IJis honeSt)', h o wcver,
had lIlade hilll mallV                                                          task. And indeed it would be easier to tansport.
(,Ilc/nies in fhe court,                                                        The soldiers wa                                                                  ed the engineer tat their master was not a man to
",lw spread slories of
                                                                                argue wit, but he insisted that the smaller mast would be the only one that
his duplicilv llId
perfidv. Filey worked                                                           would work with a machine that he was constuctng to go with it. He drew
Oll Ihe sIlIlall dav il1                                                        diagram afer diagram, and went so far as to say that he was the expert ad
lIlId day 0111 IIl1lil he Wo
tey had no clue what they were taking about. The soldiers knew their
callle t dislrl/sl Ihe
leader and at last convinced the engineer that it would be better to swalow
illll()C(,1l1 vizier and
finallv ordernl Ihe IWIII                                                       his expertise and obey.
who lliul ser\'ed hi/ll so                                                      Aer tey lef, tough, the engineer thought about it some more. What
weil 10 he plll 10 dealh.
was the point, he asked hirself, in obeying an order that would lead to fail­
/11 rhis realIlI, Ihose
ure? And so he sent the smaller mast, confident that te consul would see
cOlldel/ll1ed 10 delllh
verl' lied llfJ lind                                                            how much more effective it was and rewad hir justly.
IhmwlI inlo Ihe pell                                                            When the smaller mast arrived, Mucianus asked his soldiers for a ex­
where 111(' sllilan "1'                                                         /'1
planation. They described to hir how the engineer had argued endlessly
his Iiercesl hllntin!!,
for te smaller mast, but had finally promised to send te larger one. Mu­
do!!s. Fhe <logs wOll ltl
prolllplly lear Ihe                                                             cianus went into a rage. He could not concentate on the siege, or consider
vietilJl f() picce,\",                                                          the importance of breaching the walls before the town received reinforce­
Hefl)/,(' heil1!!, IhmwlI 10
ments. All he could think about was the impudent engineer, whom he or­
Ihe dogs. /uJlvever, Ilu!
dered to be brought to hir immediately.
vizier asket! /(Jr one lasl
re!llesl. "/ ,vollid like                                                       Arriving a few days later, the engineer gladly explained to the consul,
11'11 davs' respile, " he                                                       one more time, the reasons for the smaller mast. He went on and on, using
said, ",\"0 lhal I call pay
the same arguments he had made with the soldiers. He said it was wise to
111.' dehls, ('ollee! {l1Iy
listen to experts in these matters, and if the attac was only tied wit the
mOlle.\' due !o flIC,
relllm itOI/S Ihal people                                                                                                                                                                                                                    battering ram he had sent, te consul would not regret it. Mucianus let hir
IllIve PlIl in 111J' ('are,                                                     fish, then had                                                                   h                                                                           stripped naked before the soldiers and flogged and
lind share Ollt fll)' good.."
scourged with rods untl he died.
1I1110l1g fhe tl/elllher.\ of
my .fllll1 ily olld 111Y chi/­
drell and appoinl a                                                             Interpretation
!!uardia/l .f!,r Ihe/ll . "                                                     The engineer, whose name has not been recorded by history, had spent his
After rc('ei\'ing a gilor
life designing masts and pillars, and was respected as the finest engineer in
a/llee Ihal Ihe vizier
a city tat had excelled in te science. He knew tat he was right. A smaller
WOll/ti I/O! fr.v I() escope,
                                                                                Ihe m/li/l grallled Ihis                                                         ram would allow more speed and carry more force. Larger is not necessar­
                                                                                r('(fllc;!.                                                                      ily better. Of course te consul would see his logic, and would eventually
                                                                                TI/(' vizier hllrried
                                                                                                                                                                 understand that science is neutra and reason superior. How could the con­
                                                                                1101/11', co{{celed olle
                                                                                hlllldred gold piece"                                                            sul possibly persist in his ignorance i the engneer showed him detled di­
                                                                                Ihel1 paid a visil 10 Ihe                                                        agrams and explained the theories behind his advice?
                                                                                hlllllsllla/l who {ooked                                                         The  milit                                                                  y  engineer  was  the  quintessence  of the  Arguer,  a type
                                                                                a fier Ihe sll !tall :
                                                                                                                                                                 found everywhere among uso The Arguer does not understand tat words
70                                                                              LAW 9

ae never neutral, and tat by arguing wit a superior he impugns the intel­       dogs. lIe ofJ,'red Ihis
man the one hundred
ligenee of one more powerfl than he. He aso has no awareness of the per­
gold pieces  (lnd said.
son he is dealing with. Sinee each ma believes that he is right, ad words       "LeI me look aJler Ihe
wl raely eonvinee hir  otherwise, the arguer's reasoning falls on deaf          dogs Jor ten days. " The
hunlsran agre<'d. ani
eas. When eorered, he only argues more, digging his own grave. Onee
Jor Ihe nexl ten day.\· the
he has made the other person feel inseeure and inferior in his beliefs, the
vizier cared for fhe
eloquenee of Socrates could not save the situaton.                              hellsls wilh greal alIen­
It is not simply a question of avoiding an argument with those who              Iion, grooming Ihem
weil and feeding thCln
stand above you. We    al believe we are masters in the realm of opinions
h(/fulsomely. By Ihe end
and reasoning. You must be carefl, ten: Lear to demonstate the cor­
of the len day, Ihey
rectess of your ideas indirectly.                                               were eating Oll! of his
                                                                                hand.
                                                                                0" the eleventh day the
                                                                                vizier was called hej(Jre
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW                                                           the sullan. the charges
In  1502, in  Florenee,  Italy,  a enormous block of mable  stood in the        were repeated, aml the
sullan walched a,\ the
works department of the church of Santa Maria deI Fiore. It had once been
vizier was lied up ami
a magnificent piece of raw stone, but an unskillfl sculptor had mistakenly
thrown 10 the dogs. Yel
bored a hole through it where there should have been a figure's legs, gen­      when Ihe heasts saw
hirn. they ran up to hirn
eraly mutlating it.  Piero Soderini, Florence's mayor, had contemplated
with wagging lai/,.  They
tring to save the block by eommissioning Leonardo da Vinci to work on
nihbled affectionatelv at
it, or some other master, but ha given up, since everyone agreed that the       his shoulders and
stone had been ruined. So, despite the money that had been wasted on it, it     began playing with hirn.
The sultan mui the
gatered dust in the dark halls of the church.
olher witnesses were
This was where things stood untl some Florentne friends of the great
amazed, and Ihe sultan
                                                                                Michelangelo decided to write to the artst, then living in Rome. He alone,        asket! the vizier why the
                                                                                they said, could do something with the marble, which was stll magnificent         <logs hat! spared his
                                                                                                                                                                  life. The vizier rep lied,
                                                                                raw   material. Michelangelo traveled to Forence, examined the stone, and
                                                                                                                                                                  "f have looked afier
ea                                                                              e to the conclusion that he could in fact carve a fine figure from it, by         these dogs fl>r len days.
                                                                                adaptng the pose to the way the rock had been mutilated. Soderini argued          The su ltan Iws seen Ihe
r('slIlt for !imsc!! I
that this was a waste of tme-nobody could salvage such a disaster-but
have look"d afler you
he finally agreed to  let the  artst work  on  it.  Michelangelo  decided he
for rhirty years, and
would depict a young David, sling in hand.                                      what is the reslIll? I am
condemned (0 death Oll
Weeks  later,  as  Michelagelo  was puttng the  final  touches  on  the
Ihe strength of aCCIISI­
statue, Soderini entered the studio. Fancying hirself a bit of a connoisseur,
äons hrought by my
he    studied the huge work, and told Michelangelo that while he thought it     enerie.\'... The sullan
was magnificent, the nose, he judged, was too big. Michelagelo realized         blus!ted wilh share.
He not only p a rdofled
tat Soderini was standing in a place right under the giant figure and did
Ihe vizier hut gave him
not have the proper perspeetve. Without a word, he gestred for Soderini
{ fine set ofclothes ami
t follow hir up the  sca                                                                                                                                          olding.  Reaching the  nose,  he  picked up  his   hwuled over Iu hirn the
                                                                                ehisel, as well as a bit of marble dust that lay on the planks. With Soderini                                                        men who had slandered
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     his repulalion. The nohle
                                                                                just a few feet below hir on the scaffolding, Micelagelo started to tap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     vizier set Ihnn free and
                                                                                lightly with the ehisel, lettng the bits of dust he had gathered in his hand to                                                      continlled to Ireat Ihem
                                                                                fal little by little. He actually did nothing to cange the nose, but gave                                                            wirh kindlless.
every appearance of working on it.                                              M                                                                                 ter a few minutes of this charade he               THE Sl!BTLE RlJSE:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     THF BOOK 0[ ARABIC
                                                                                stood aside: "Look at it now." "I like it better," replied Soderini, "you've                                                         WISDOM AND CHJlLE,
made it come alive. "                                                                                                                                                                                                rH I RTEENTH C E N T I J / Y
LAW 9                                                                           71

Interpretation
Tllf: WOHKS OF                                                                 MI.\SIS
Michelangelo knew that by changing the shape of te nose he might ruin
When Apries had been                                                           the entre sculpture. Yet Soderini was a paton who prided hirself on his
deposed in the way I
aesthetc judgment. To    offend such a man by aguing would not only gain
have described, Amasis
Michelagelo  nothing,  it  would  put  fture   commissions   in  jeopardy.
came to the throne. He
belonged to the district                                                       Michelangelo   was   too   clever   to   argue.   His   soluton   was   to   cage
of Sais and was a                                                              Soderini's perspective  (literally bringing hir  closer  to  te no se)  witout
native of the town
making hir reaze that tis was the cause of bis mispercepton.
cal/ed Siuph. At first
Fortunately for posterit, Michelagelo found a way to keep the per­
the Egyptians were
inclined to be contemp­                                                        f ction of the statue intact while at the same tme making Soderini believe
tuous, and did not                                                             he had improved it. Such is the double power of winning trough actons
think much of him
rather than argument: No one is offended, and your point is proven.
because ofhis humble
and undistinguished
origin; but later on he
cleverly brought them
KEYS TO POWER
to heel, without having
I te realm of power you must le                                                a                                                                                   to judge your moves by teir long­
recourse to harsh
measures.                                                                      term effects on oter people. The problem in                                         tng to prove a point or
Amongst his innumer­                                                           gain a victory through argument is tat in the end you can never be certain
able treasures, he had a                                                       how it affects the people you're arguing with: They may appear to agree
gold footbath, whieh he
                                                                               wit you politely, but inside tey may resent you. Or perhaps someting
and his guests used on
occasion to wash their                                                         you  said inadvertently  even  offended them-words  have  that insidious
feet in. This he broke                                                         ability to be iterpreted according to the other person's mood and insecuri­
up, and with the mate­
tes. Even the best argument has no solid foundaton, for we have all come
rial had a statue made
to distust the slippery nature of words. And days afer agreeing with some­
to one of the gods,
which he then set up in                                                        one, we ofen revert t our old opinion out of sheer habit.
what he thought the                                                            Understand this: Words are a dime a dozen. Everyone knows tat in
most suitable spot in
the heat of an argument, we will all say anyting to support our cause. We
the city. The Egyptians
will quote te Bible, refer to unverifiable statstcs. Who ca be persuaded
constantly eoming
upon the statue, treated                                                       by bags of                                                                          a                                         like that? Acton and demonstraton are much more power­
it with profound re ver­                                                                                                                                           f and mea                                 ngfl. They are tere, before our eyes, for us to se    "Yes,
enee, and as soon as
now the statue's no se does look just right. " There are no offensive words,
Amasis heard of the
no possibilit of misinterpretation. No one can argue wit a demonstrated
effeet it had upon them,
he cal/ed a meeting and                                                        proof.  As Batasar Graciän remarks,  "The truth is generally  seen, rarely
revealed the fact that                                                         head."
the deeply revered
Sir Christopher Wren was England's version of the Renaissance man.
statue was unce a foot­
He had mastered the  sciences  of mathematics,  astonomy,  physics,  and
bath, which they
washed their feet and                                                          physiology. Yet during bis extremely long career as England's most cele­
pissed and vomited in.                                                         brated  architect he  was  often told  by  his  patrons  to  make  impractical
He went on to say that
changes in his designs. Never once did he ague or offend. He had other
his own case was much
ways of proving his point.
the same, in that once
he had been only an                                                            In 1688 Wren designed a ma                                                          ificent town hall for the city of West­
ordinary person and                                                            minster. The mayor, however, was not satsfied; in fact he was nervous. He
was now their king; so
                                                                               told Wren he was araid the second floor was not seeure, and tat it could
that just as they had
come to revere the                                                             al come crashing down on his office on te first floor. He demanded tat
transformed footbath,                                                          Wren add two stone columns for extra support. Wren, the consummate en­
so they had better pay                                                         gineer,  knew  tat these  columns would serve no purpose,  and  that  the
72                                                                             LAW 9

mayor's fears were baseless. But build them he did, ad the mayor was             honor and respeet to
him, tao. In this way
gratefl. It was only yeas later that workmen on a high scaffold saw that
the Egyptians were
the columns stopped just short of the ceiling.
persuaded to aceept
They were dummies. But both men got what they wanted: The mayor                  him as their master.
could relax, ad Wren knew posterit would understand that his orignal             THE HISTORIES,
HERODOTUS,
design worked and the columns were unnecessary.
FIFTH CENTURY H.C.
The power of demonstratng your idea is that your opponents do not
get defensive, and are therefore more open to persuasion. Making them lit­
erally and physically feel your meaning is infinitely more powerful than ar­
gment.
A  heckler  once  interrupted  Nikita  Khrushchev in  the  middle  of a
speech in which he was denouncing the crimes of Stalin. "You were a col­
(;OD A\D .\BRAIIAM
league of Stalin's," the heckler yelled, "why didn't you stop hir then?"
Khrushschev apparently could not see the hecler and barked out, "Who             The Most High God
had promised that He
said that?" No hand went up. No one moved a muscle.                              Aer a few seconds
would not take Abra­
of   tense silence, Khrushchev finally said in a quiet voice, "Now you know
ham 's  soul unless the
why I didn't stop hir." Instead of just arguing that anyone facing Stalin        man wanted to die and
was aaid, knowing that the slightest sign of rebellion would mean certain        asked Him to da so.
When Abraham 's Life
death, he had made them fel what it was like to face Stain-had made
was drawing to a elose,
them feel the paranoia, the fea of speaking up, the terror of confronting
and God determined to
the leader, in this case Khrushchev. The demonstraton was visceral and no        seize him, He sent an
angel in the guise of a
more argment was necessary.
deerepit old man who
The most powerfl persuasion goes beyond acton into symbol. The
was almost entirely
power of a symbol-a flag, a mythic story, a monument to some emotional           ineapaeitated. The old
event-is that everyone understands you without anything being said. In           man stopped outside
1975, when Henry Kissinger was engaged in some frustating negotiations           Abraham :y door and
                                                                                 said to him, "Oh Abra­
with the Israelis over the retur of part of the Sinai desert that they had
                                                                                 ham, I would like
seized in the 1967 war, he suddenly broke off a tense meeting and decided        something to eat. "
to do some sight-seeing. He paid a visit to the ruins of the ancient fortress    Abraham was amazed
10 hear him say this.
of  Masada, known to all Israelis as the place where seven hundred Jewish
" Die, " exclaimed Abra­
wariors  committed  mass  suicide  in  A.D.   73 rather  than  give  i to  the
ham. "It wOllld be
Roman troops besiegng them. The Israelis instatly understood the mes­            betterfor you than to
sage of Kissinger's visit: He was indirectly accusing them of courting mass      go on living in that
condition. .
suicide. Although the visit did not by itself chage their minds, it made
Abraham always kept
them think far more seriously than any direct waring would have. Sym­
food ready at his home
bols like this one carry great emotona significance.                             for passing guests. So
Wen aiming for power, or tying to conserve it, always look for the               he gave the old man a
bowl conlaining broth
indirect route. And also choose your battles careflly. If it does not matter
and meat with bread
in the long run whether the other person agrees with yo                          u                        if tme and
crumbs. The old man
their own experience will make them understand what you mean-then it             sal down 10 eal. He
is best not  even to bother with a demonstration.  Save  your  energy  and       swallowed laboriously,
with greal effort, and
walk away.
onee when he look
same food it dropped
from his hand, scatter­
ing on the grollnd. "Oh
Abraham, " he saiel.
LAW 9                                                                            73

"help me to cat. " Ahra­
ham took the food in
his hand and lifted it to
the old man :5 lip.\". Hut
Image: The  See­
it slid down his heard
and over his ehest.                                                           saw. Up and down
" What is your age, olli                                                      and up and down
man?" asked Ahraham.
go the arguers,
The oltl man
getting nowhere
mentioned a numher of
years slightly greater                                                        fast. Get off the
than Ahraham :, old                                                           seesaw and show
ag". Then Ahraham
them your mean­
exclaimed: "Oh Lord
ing without kick
Our God, take me unto
You hefore I reach this                                                       ing or pushing.
man :, age ami sink into                                                      Leave them at the
the same conditiofl as
top and let gravity
he is in now. " No
bring them gently
SOOfler had Ahraham
spoken those words                                                            to the ground.
than God took {osse,\'­
sion of his soul.
THE SlJBTLF RtJSE:
rIlE BOOK OF Al{ABIC
Authority: Never argue. In society nothing must be dis­
WISDOM AND (lUlLE,
THIRTH.NTH CFNTlJRY                                                           cussed; give only results, (Benjamin Disraeli, 1804-1881)
REVERSAL
Verbal agument has one vita use in the realm of power: To    distact and
cover your tracks when you are practicing decepton or are caught in a He.
In such cases it is to your advatage to argue with all the conviction you
can muster. Draw the oter person into an argument to distract them fom
your deceptive move. When caught in a He, te more emotional and cer­
tain you appear, te less Hkely it seems tat you are lying.
This technique has saved the hide of many a con artist. Once Count
Victor Lustg, swindler par excellence, had sold dozens of suckers around
te country a phony box wit which he claimed to be able to copy money.
Discovering teir mistae, the suckers generaly chose not to go the police,
rather tan risk the embarrassment of publicity. But one Sheriff   Richards,
74                                                                            LAW 9

of Remsen County, Oklahoma, was not the kind of ma to accept being
conned out of $ 10,000, and one moming he tracked Lustg down to a hotel
in Chicago.
Lustg heard a knock on the door. When he opened it he was looking
down the barel of a                                                             g    .    "What  seems  to be the problem ?" he calmly
asked. "You son of a bitch," yelled the sheriff,  "1'm going to kill you. You
conned me with that damn box of yours ! "  Lustg feigned confsion. "You
mean it's not working?" he asked. "You know it's not working," replied the
sheriff. "But that's impossible," said Lustg. "There's no way it couldn't be
working. Did you operate it properly?" "I did exactly what you told me to
do," said the  sheriff.  "No, you must have done something wrong,"  said
Lustig. The argument went in circles. The barel of the                          g    was gently low­
ered.
Lustg next went to phase to in the agument tactc: He poured out a
whole bunch of technical gobbledygook about the box's operaton, com­
pletely beguiling the sheriff, who now appeared less sure of himself ad a­
gued less forceflly. "Look," said Lustg, "1'11 give you your money back
rght now.  1'11 also give you written instuctons on how to work the ma­
chine and 1'11 come out to Oklahoma to make sure it's working properly.
There's no way you can lose on that." The sheriff reluctatly agreed. To
satsf him tota1ly, Lustg took out a hundred one-hundred-dollar bills and
gave tem to him, telling him to relax ad have a fn weekend in Chicago.
Calmer and a little confsed, the sheriff fally lef. Over the next few days
Lustg checked the paper every moming. He finally found what he was
looking for: A short article reportng Sheriff Richards's arrest, trial, and
conviction for passing counterfeit notes. Lustg had won the argument; the
sheriff never bothered hir again.
LAW 9                                                                           75

LAW
10
IN FE CTION: AVOID THE
UNHAP PY AN D UN LU C KY
JUDGMENT
You can diefrom someone ele ' misery-emotional states
are as infectious as diseases. You may feel you are help­
ing the drowning man but you are only precipitating
your own disaster. The unfortunate sometimes draw mis­
fortune on themselves; the will also draw it on you. As­
sociate with the happy and fortunate instead.
76

TRAN S G RE S S I O N  OF THE LAW
Bor in Lmerick, Ireland, in 1818, Marie Gilbert came to Paris in the
Tm                                                                              :                               ,1 T .\\1) TIL
1840s to make her fortune as a dancer and performer. Taking the name
CA\lp·\'I I .E
Lola Montez (her mother was of distant Spanish descent), she clamed to
A nul found ilself
be a flamenco dancer fom Spain. By 1845 her career was languishing, and
('{Irried by a crow (0 Ihe
to survive she became a courtesan-quickly one of the more successfl in          top of a tall campanile,
Paris.                                                                          and by falling into a
                                                                                creviee succeeded in
Only one man could salvage Lola's dacing career: Alexadre Du­
                                                                                escaping its dread fate.
jaer, owner of the newspaper with the lagest circulaton in France, and          It then hesollght the
also the newspaper's drama critic. She decided to woo and conquer hir.          wall to shelter it, hy
Investgatng his habits, she discovered tat he went riding every moring.         appealing to il hy Ihe
grace of God, and
A excellent horsewoman herself, she rode out one moming and "acciden­
praising ir.v heiglzt, and
tIy" ran into hir. Soon they were riding together every day. A few weeks
the beauty and noble
later Lola moved into his apartment.                                            tone of its heils. "Ala.\', "
il went on, "as I havr
For a while te two were happy together. With Dujaier's help, Lola
not heen ahle to drop
began to revive her dancing career. Despite te risk to his social standing,
beneath the green
Dujarier told friends he would mary her in the spring. (Lola had never          branches ofmy old
told hir that she had eloped at age nineteen with an Englishman, and was        Father and to Ue in Ihe
fallow earth covered by
still iegally married.) Although Dujarier was deeply in love, rs life started
his fallen leaves, do
t slide downhill.
YOll, at least, not aban­
His fortunes in business changed and influental friends began to avoid          don me. When I found
hir. One night Dujarier was invited to a party, attended by some of the         myself in the beak of
the cruel crow 1 made a
weathiest young men in Paris. Lola wanted to go too but he would not
vow, that if 1 escaped I
allow it. They had their first quarrel, and Dujarier attended the part by
would end my life in a
hirself. There, hopelessly drunk, he insulted an influential draa critc,        httle hole. "
Jean-Baptste Rosemond de Beauvalion, perhaps because of someting the            At these words, the
wall, moved wilh
critc had said about Lola. The following moring Beauvalion challenged
compassion, was
hir to a duel. Beauvaion was one of the best pistol shots in France. Du­
content 10 shelter the
jaer tried to apologize, but the duel took place, and he was shot and           nut in Ihe spot where it
klled. Thus ended te life of one of te most promising young men of              had fallen. Within a
"horl time, the nut burst
Paris societ. Devastated, Lola lef Paris.
open: lls roots' reached
In 1846 Lola Montez found herself in Munic, where she decided to
in between Ihe creviccs
woo and conquer King Ludwig of Bavaia. The best way to Ludwig, she              of Ihe stones and began
discovered, was through his aide-de-camp, Count Otto von Rechberg, a            to push them apart; its
shoots pressed IIp
man wit a fondness for pretty girls. One day when the count was brea­
toward Ihe sky. They
fastng at an outdoor cafe, Lola rode by on her horse, was "accidentaly"
soon rose above the
trown from the saddle, ad landed at Rechberg's feet. The count rushed           building, and as Ihe
to help her and was enchanted. He promised to introduce her to Ludwig.          twisled roors grew
thicker they began to
Rechberg arranged an audience with the king for Lola, but when she
thrust ihe walls apart
aived in the anteroom, she could hear the king saying he was too busy to
and force ihe andenl
meet a favor-seeking stranger. Lola pushed aside the sentries and entered       stones from iheir olt!
his roor anyway. In the process, the front of her dress somehow got tom         placcs. Then Ihe wall,
too late and in vain,
(perhaps by her, perhaps by one of the sentries), and to the astonishment of
bewailed the cause of
al, most especially the king, her bare breasts were braenly exposed. Lola
its destruction, al/(l in
wa granted her audience wit Ludwig. Fif-five hours later she made her           short time it fell in ruin.
debut on te Bavarian stage; the reviews were terrible, but that did not stop    LEONARDO DA V1NC1.
                                                                                1452- J519
Ludwig from arranging more performances.
                                                                                LAW 10                          77

Ludwig  was,  i n  his  own  words,  "bewitched"  b y  Lola.  H e  started
t appear in public with her on his                                              a                                                                              , and then he bought and                                                  fshed
In his OH'11 lillie Sirnon
an apart                                                                        ent for her on one of Munich's most fashionable boulevads. Al­
TholllllS was II grellt
do('lor. I remelll/Jer Ihal                                                     though he had been known as a miser,  and was  not given to  flights  of
I ha!'pell er! t lIleel him                                                     fancy, he started to shower Lola with gis and to write poetry for her. Now
olle day al Ihe hOflle of
his favored mistress, she catapulted to fa                                      e and fortune ovemight.
a rich o l d  ('onsumpli v<':
Lola began to lose her sense of proporton. One day when she was out
/{e lold his palient
when discus.\"inK ways                                                          riding, an elderly man rode aead of her, a bit too slowly for her liking.
to cure him Ihal one                                                            Unable to pass him, she began to slash hir with her riding crop. On a­
nzellns was 10 provide
other occasion she took her dog,  unleashed,  out for a stoll. The dog at­
occ{{sio/\' for nIe to
tacked a passerby, but instead of helping the  man  get te  dog away, she
ell}oy his comparV: He
('ould rher fix his eyes                                                        whipped hir with the leash. Incidents like tis infriated the stolid citizens
0// Ihe freshlless of my
of Bavaria, but Ludwig stood by Lola and even had her naturalized as a
countenll1('e lind his
Bavarian citizen. The king's entourage tried to wake hir to the dangers of
Ilwughls on the over­
the aair, but those who critcied Lola were s                                    u                                                                              arily fired.
flowing eheerf"lness
and viKor offny :\oung                                                          While  Bavarians  who  had  loved  teir  king  now  outwardly  disre­
marllwor; hy filling all
spected hir, Lola was made a countess, had a new palace built for herself,
his seilses wirh Ihe
and bega to dabble in politcs, advising Ludwig on policy. She was  te
flower ofmy youlh his
condilion mighl                                                                 most power                                                                     force in te kingdom. Her influence in the king's cabinet
improve. Ile forgol 10                                                                                                                                         continued to grow, and she treated te other ministers wit disdain. As a
add thaI mine miRht
result, riots broke out throughout te realm. A once peaceful land was vir­
gel worse.
tually in the grip  of civil war,  and  students everywhere  were  cating,
MONTAIGNE,
1 533- 1 592                                                                    ''us mit Lol!"
By February of 1848, Ludwig was finally unable to withstad the pres­
sure. Wit great sadness he ordered Lola t leave Bavaria immediately.
She left, but not untl she was paid off. For te next five weeks the Bavari­
ans' wrat was tumed against their formerly beloved king. In Marc of that
yea he was forced to abdicate.
Lola Montez moved to England. More tha ayting she needed re­
Many Ihings are said 10
spectability, and despite being married (she still had not arranged a divorce
/Je inj('clious. Sieepi­
ness C(ln he infectious,                                                        from te Englishman she had wed years before),  she  set her sights  on
and yawning as weIl. In                                                         George Trafford Head, a promising young army officer who was the son of
large-scale slraregy.
an iluental barister. Although he was ten yeas younger than Lola, and
wh<'t/ Ihe enemy is
could have chosen a wife among the prettest and wealtiest young girls of
agilaler allli shows a/1
inclillaliot/ 10 rush. ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                English societ,  Heald fell under her speIl.  They were married in  1849.
nOI II/irul in the leasl.                                                                                                                                                                                                                Soon arrested on the charge  of bigamy,  she skipped bal, and she and
Make a show oI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Heald made their way to Spain. They quarreled horribly and on one occa­
eOl1lplele calmt/ess. a/!{l
                                                                                sion Lola slashed                                                              h                                                                         with a knife. Finally, she drove                                            h                                 away. Retu   ing
Ihe e//ell/ v will h e  laken
hv Ihis and will !ecome                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to England, he found he had lost his position in te army. Ostracized from
relaxed. Yo u inji'cI Iheir                                                                                                                                                                                                              English society, he moved to Portugal, where he lived in povert. After a
spiril. You can inj,'cI
few months his short life ended in a boatng accident.
Ihefll will! a carefree.
A few years later te man who published Lola Montez's autobiogra­
drunklike spiril. wirh
horedonl, or evet                                                               phy went bankrupt
weakness.
In 1853 Lola moved to Caifomia, where she met and married a man
i H O O 1. O!· F I V E  R I N (,S,
named Pat Hull. Their relatonship was as stormy as all te others, and she
MIYAMOTO MIiSASIII.
                                                                                SFVFlTI; t·:NTH  Cr,NTlJRY                                                     lef Hull for anoter man. He took to                                       d                                                                           and fell into a deep depression
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tat lasted until he died, four years later, stll a relatvely young man.
78                                                                              LAW 10

At the age of forty-one, Lola gave away her clothes ad finery and
tured to God. She toured America, lecturing on religious topics, dressed
Regard nu J)/ish  man
in white and wearing a halolike white headgear. She died two years later, in
as cul/ured, IhOl/gh you
1861.                                                                             may reckon a gijted
man as wise; and
esteen1 n o  iRnorant
Interpretation
abstainer a {Flie ascetic.
Lola Montez attacted men with her wiles, but her power over them went
Do nol cunsorl witlz
beyond the sexual. It was through the force of her chaacter that she kept         fools, especially Ihose
her lovers enthralled. Men were sucked into the maelstom she chured up            wh" consider Ihon­
selves wise. Ami be nol
aound her. They feIt confsed, upset, but the stength of the emotons she
self-satisfied witlz your
strred also made them feel more alive.
own ;gnorance. Lei
As is ofen the case with infecton, the problems would only aise over              your ;nlercol/rse be
only wilh men ofguod
tme. Lola's inherent instability would begin to get under her lovers' skin.
repule;!or il is by suc/z
Tey would find themselves drawn into her problems, but their emotonal
associalion Ihal men
attachment to her would make them want to help her. This was the crucial          l/emselves al1a;n 10
point of the disease-for Lola Montez could not be helped. Her problems            good repute. Do YOl/
nol observe how
were too deep. Once the lover identfied with them, he was lost. He would
sesame-oi! ;. m;ngled
fnd hirself embroiled in quareIs. The infection would spread to his fam­
wilh roses or violels
ily ad friends, or, in the case of Ludwig, to an entire naton. The only so­       and how, when it Iws
luton would be to cut her off, or suffer a eventual collapse.                     been for some lime ;n
lssociatiofl with roses
The infectng-character type is not restricted to women; it has nothing
or viole!.\, it ceases to
to do with gender. It sters fom a inward instability that radiates outward,
be sesame-oi! ami ;.
drawng dis aster upon itself. There is almost a desire to destroy ad unset­                                 cal/ed oi! of roses or oil
tle. You could spend a lifetme studying the pathology of infectng caac­                                     of  violets?
ters, but don't waste your tme-just lear the lesson.                              Wen you suspect           A M I R R O R  FOR P R I N CES,
                                                                                                            KAI KA'US [BN
you are in the presence of an infector, don't ague, don't ty to help, don't                                 [SKANDAR,
pass the person on to your fiends, or you will become enmeshed. Fee the                                     ELEVENTH CENTLJRY
infector's presence or suffer the consequences.
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look. He thinks too much. . . .
I do not know the man I should avoid so soon as that spare Cassius. . . .
Such men as he be never at heart's ease whiles the behold a greater
than themselves, and thereore are the very dangerous.
Julius Caesar,  William Shakespeare, 1564-1616
KEYS TO POWER
Those misfortunates among us who have been brought down by circum­
stances beyond their contol  deserve all the help and sympathy we can
gve them. But there ae others who are not bor to misfortune or unhappi­
ness, but who draw it upon themselves by their destuctive actions and un­
settling effect on others. It would be a great thing if we could raise them up,
change their patters, but more ofen than not it is their patters that end
up   gettng inside and chaging uso The reason is simple-humas are ex­
temely susceptible to the moods, emotions, and even the ways of thinking
of those with whom they spend their time.
The incurably unhappy and unstable have a particularly strong infect-
LAW 10                                                                            79

ing power because their characters and emotons are so intense. They ofen
present themselves as victims, ma                                                  ng it difficult, at first, to see teir mis­
eries as self-inflicted. Before you realize the rea natre of their problems
you have been infected by them.
Understand this: In the ga                                                         e of power, the people you associate with
are critica. The risk of associating with infectors is that you will waste valu­
able time and energy trying to free yourself. Through a kind of guilt by as­
sociaton, you will also suffer in the eyes of others. Never underestimate the
dangers of infection.
There are many kinds of infector to be aware of, but one of the most
insidious is the sufferer fom chronic dissatisfacton.  Cassius, the Roman
conspirator against Julius Caesar, had the discontent that comes from deep
envy. He simply could not endure the presence of ayone of greater talent.
Pobably  because  Caesar  sensed  te  man's  interminable  soumess,  he
passed hir up for te positon of first praetorship, and gave te position to
Brutus instead. Cassius brooded and broor.ed, his hated for Caesar be­
coming pathological. Bruts himself, a devoted republican, disliked Cae­
sar's dictatorship ; had he had the patience to wait, he would have become
the first man in Rome afer Caesar's death, and could have undone the evil
that the leader had wrought. But Cassius infected hir with his own rancor,
bending his ea daily with tales of Caesa's evil. He finally won Brutus over
to the conspiracy. It was the beginning of a great tragedy. How many mis­
fortunes could have been avoided had Brutus lea                                    ed to fea the power of
infecton.
There is only one soluton to infection: quarantine.  But by the time
you recognize the problem it is ofen too late. A Lola Montez overwhelms
you with her forcefl personality. Cassius intigues you with his confiding
nature and the depth of his feelings. How can you protect yourself against
such insidious viruses? The  answer lies  in judging people on the effects
they have on the world and not on the reasons  they give for their prob-
Image:  A Virus.  Unseen,  it
lems. Infectors can be recognized by the misfortune they draw on them­
enters  your  pores  without
selves, their trbulent past, their long line o f broken relationships, their un­
waming,  spreading  silently  and
stable careers, and the very force of their character, which sweeps you up
slowly.  Before you are aware of
and maes you lose your reason. Be forewa                                           ed by tese signs of a infec-
the infection, it is deep inside you.
tor; lea                                                                           to see the discontent in their eye. Most importat of all, do not
take pity. Do not enmesh yourself in trying to help. The infector will re­
main unchanged, but you will be unhinged.
The other side of infection is equally valid, and perhaps more readily
understood: There ae people who attract happiness to themselves by their
good cheer, natural buoyancy, and intelligence. They are a source of plea­
sure, ad you must associate with them to share in the prosperity they draw
upon themselves.
80                                                                                 LAW 10

This applies to more than good cheer and success: All positve quali­
tes can infect uso                                                                 Tleyrad had many stage and intmidatng trats, but
most agreed that he surpassed all Frencmen in graciousness, aristocratc
charm, and wit. Indeed he came fom one of the oldest noble families in
te country, ad despite his belief in democracy ad the French Republic,
he retained his courtly manners. His contemporary Napoleon was in may
ways the opposite                                                                  a peasant fom Corsica, tacitum and ungracious, even
violent.
There was no one Napoleon admired more than Talleyrand. He en­
ved  his  minister's  way  with  people,  his  wit  and  his  ability  to  clarm
women, and as best he could, he kept Talleyrad aound him, hoping to
soak up the culture he lacked. There is no doubt that Napoleon changed as
his rule cvntnued. Many of the rough edges  were smoothed by his con­
stat associaton with Talleyrand.
Use the positve side of this emotional osmosis to advantage. If, for ex­
ample, you are miserly by nature, you will never go beyond a certain limit;
only generous souls attain geatess. Associate wit the generous, then,
and they will infect you, opening up everything that is tight ad restricted
in you. If you are gloomy, gravitate to the cheerfl. I you are prone to iso­
laton, force yourself to befiend te gregarious. Never associate with those
who  share  your  defects-they will reinforce  everything that holds you
bac. Only create associatons with positve affinities. Make this a rule of
life and you will benefit more than fom a the therapy in the world.
Authority:  Recognize  the  fortu­
nate  so  that  you   may  choose
their company, and the unfortu­
nate   so   that   you   may   avoid
them. Misfortune is usually the
crime of folly, and among those
who  suffer from it  there  is no
malady more contagious: Never
open your door to  the least of
misfortunes, for, if you do, many
others will follow in its train
Do not die of another's misery.
(Baltasar  Graciän,                                                                1601-1658)
REVERSAL
This law admits ofno reversal. Its application is universal. There is nothing
to    be gained by associatng with those who infect you with their misery;
tere is only power and good fortune to be obtained by associating with
the fortunate. Ignore this law at your peril.
LAW !O                                                                             81

LAW
11
LEARN TO KEEP PEOPLE
DEPENDENT ON YOU
JUDGMENT
To     maintain your indeendence you must always be
needed and wanted. The more you are relied on, the more
freedom you have. Mae peol deend on you for their
happiness and prsperity and you have nothing to fear.
Nee teach them enough so that the can do without you.
82

TRAN S G RE S S I O N  O F  THE LAW
Sometime in the Middle Ages, a mercenary soldier (a condotiere), whose
1                                                                                    1 1 1,:  TII < >               11<>lbl:-
name has not been recorded, saved the town of Siena from a foreign ag­
Tivo horses  v('r(' ClIrr.v­
gressor. How could the good citzens of Siena reward hir? No                          aount of
ing {Iv" !oads, The lronl
money or honor could possibly compare in value to the preservaton of a
Horse wenl wel!, hul
city's liberty. The citizens thought of making the mercenay the lord of the          Ihe rear !lorse IVI ,I'
city, but even that, they decided, wasn't recompense enough. At lat one of           !azv, "fhe men !Jegilfl 10
pi!e Ihe rellr !lorse '
them stood before the assembly called to debate this matter and sad, "Let
!olld Oll Ihe ji"f1{
us kill hir and then worship hir as our paton saint." And so they did.
Horse; when Ihel' h"d
The Count of Camagnola was ene of the bravest ad most successfl                      lransfi'rred il ll!!, Ihe
of all the condotieri. In 1442, late in his life, he was in the employ of the city   rear Horse Jl!/lnd il
                                                                                     easy f{oing. and he said
of Venice, which was i the midst of a long war with Florence. The count
                                                                                     10 Ihe firml Hor,l'e:
was suddenly recalled to Venice. A favorite of the people, he was received           " 7()i! lInd sweill! 711'
there with all kinds of honor and splendor. That evening he was to dine              JlfOre YOIl (ry, Ihe 1lJ(lre
VOll !/((ve 10 slltli'r, "
with the doge hirself, in the doge's palace. On the way into the palace,
Whcn Ihel' rmched Ihe
however, he notced that the guard was leading hir in a different directon
/avern, (he OlVner said;
from  usual.  Crossing the  famous Bridge of Sighs, he suddenly realized
" Wh v  sholl!tf I (i}(!der
where  they were taking him-to  the dungeon.  He was  convicted  on  a               {wo horses  1}hell I
('({rrv all Oll OIl C :  I had
trumped-up charge and the next day in the Piazza Sa Marco, before a
heller givc I!li' (If/{' i111
horrified crowd who could not understand how his fate had changed so
Ihc /f)()d it Will/lI, (/I/(!
drastically, he was beheaded.                                                        cul lhe t!m)(I " ( Ihe
olher; i11 !cilsr I sl/((!!
have Ilw h it/c, " A I/{! ,\'()
Interpretation
he did,
Many of the great condotieri of Renaissance Itay suffered the same fate as
J A B I . L S .
te paton saint of Siena and the Count of Carmagnola: They won battle                 Lr:o TOLSTOY.
ater battle for their employers only to find themselves banished, impris­            IK2H-1910
oned, or executed. The problem was not ingratitude; it was that there were
so many other condotieri as able ad valiant as they were. They were re­
placeable. Nothing was lost by killing them. Meawhile, the older                     aong
tem had grown powerfl themselves, and wanted more and more money
for  their services. How much better, then, to do away with them ad hire a
younger, cheaper mercenary. That was the fate  of the Count of Cama­
gola, who had stated to act impudently and independently. He had taken
his power for granted without maing sure that he was truly indispensable.
Such is the fate (to a less violent degree, one hopes) of those who do
not make others dependent on them. Sooner or later someone comes along
who  can do the job as weIl as they can-someone younger, fresher, less ex­
pensive, less threatening.
Be the only one who can do what you do, and make the fate of those who
hire you so entwined with yours that they cannot possibly get rid of you.
Oterwise you will someday be forced to cross your own Bridge of Sighs.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
When Qtto von Bismarck became a deputy in the Pussian parliament in
1847, he was thirty-two years old and without an ally or fiend. Looking
LAW 1 1                                                                              83

around hir, he decided that the side to aly hirself with was not the par­
liament's liberals or conservatves, not ay partcular minister, and cer­
1                                                                               11                                                                           1,  LXI' T I I X I                                                         I   L"ED
tainly not the people. It was with the king, Frederick Willia IV This was
B\  I I I II:'E                                                                 U
an odd choice to say te least, for Frederick was at a low point of his power.
Then the Woman
A weak, indecisive man, he consistently gave in to the liberas in parlia­
lallghed and set the Cat
a bowl ofthe warm                                                               ment; in fact he was spineless, and stood for much that Bismarck disliked,
white milk ami said, "0                                                         personaly and politcally. Yet Bismarck courted Frederick night and day.
Cat, y o u  are a s  clever
                                                                                When oter deputies attacked te king for his many inept moves, only Bis­
as a ,nan, hut remem­
ha that your bargain                                                            marck stood by hir.
was not made with the                                                           Finally, it al paid off: In 185 1 Bismack was made a minister in the
Man vr the Dog, and I                                                           king's ca)inet. Now he went to work. Time and again he forced the king's
do not know whal they
hand, getting rum t build up the militay, t stand up to the liberals, to do
will do when Ihey eome
exactly as Bismarck wished. He worked on Frederick's insecurity about his
home, " "What is that 10
me?" said the Cat. "If I                                                        manliness, challenging rm to be firm and to mle with pride. And he
have my plaee in the
slowly restored the king's powers until the monarcy was once again the
Cave by the Jre ami my
most power force in Pussia.
warm white milk three
times a day, I do nol                                                           When Frederick died, in                                                      1861, his brother William assumed the
ellre what the Man or                                                           throne. William disliked Bismarck intensely and had no intenton of keep­
the Dog ean do. "                                                               ing hir around. But he also inherited the same situation his brother had:
.  .  . Ami from thaI day
                                                                                eneres galore, who wated to rubble his power away. He actually consid­
to thi.l, Best Beloved,
thre! proper Men oul                                                            ered abdicating, feeling he lacked the strength to deal wit this dangerous
ofJive will always                                                              and precarious position. But Bismarck insinuated hirself once again. He
throw things at a Cat
stood by the new king, gave hir strength, and urged hir into                    f                                                                            and de­
whcnever they meet
cisive action. The king grew dependent on Bismac's strong-arm tactcs to
hilll, and all proper
[ogs will ('hase him up                                                         keep his enemies at bay, and despite his antpathy towad the man, he soon
a tree. But the Cat                                                             made rum his prime minister. The two quarreled ofen over policy­
keeps his side ofthe
Bismarck was much more conservative-but the king understood his own
hllrgain tvo. He will kill
dependency. Whenever the prime minister threatened to resign, the king
mice, ami he will be
kind to Rabies when he                                                          gave in to rm, tme aer time. It was in fact Bismarck who set state policy.
is in fhe house, JUSf as                                                        Years later, Bismarck's actons as Prussia's prime minister led te vari­
long fiS they do not pull
ous German state  to be united into one country. Now Bismarck finagled
his tail too hard. Bul
the king into lettng hirself be crowned emperor of Germany. Yet it was
when he has done that,
and belween limes, and                                                          really Bismarck who had reached the heights of power. As right-hand man
when Ihe moon gels Ip                                                           to the emperor, and as imperial cancellor and knighted prince, he pulled
ami Ihe nighl comes, he
all the levers.
is Ihe Cat Iha! walks by
himsel/; and all plaees
are alike fo him. Then                                                          Interpretation
he goes oul to the Wet                                                          Most young and ambitous politicians looking out on the political landscape
Wild Woods or up Ihe
                                                                                of 1840s Germay would have tied to build a power base among those
Wel Wild Trces or on
the Wet Wild Roofs,                                                             wit the most power. Bismarck saw different. Joirung forces with the pow­
waving his wild tail                                                            er can be foolish: They will swallow you up, just as the doge of Venice
and walking by his                                                              swallowed up the Count of Carmagnola. No one will come to depend on
wild lone.
you i they are aready stong. If you are ambitious, it is much wiser to seek
HST so STOHIES,
out weak mlers or masters with whom you ca create a relatonsrp of de­
RUDYARD KIPLlNG,
                                                                                1 865-1936                                                                   pendency. You become teir stength, their intelligence, their spine. What
                                                                                                                                                             power you hold! If they got rid of you the whole edifice would collapse.
84                                                                              LAW 1 1

Necessity mIes the world. People rarely act unless compelled t. If you
create no need for yourself, then you will be done away with at first oppor­
Tm                                                                              :  E                                                                     L                       I-TBI': E   \\1>
tunity. If, on the other hand, you understand the Laws of Power and make
1'1 1 1,:                                                                       \ 1 \ 1-'
others depend on you for their welfare, if you can counteract their weak­
An extravagant young
ness with your own "iron and blood," in Bismack's phrase, then you will
Vinc, vainly amhitious
sU                                                                              ive your masters as Bismarck  did.  You will have  al the benefits  of   of irulependencc, and
                                                                                power without the thoms that come from being a master.                   fond oframhling al
large, despised the
alliance ofa stately elm
Thus a wise prince will think 0/ ways to keep his citizens 0/ every sart
Ihat grew near, ami
and under every circumstance dependent on the state and on him;                 courted her emhraces.
and then the will always be trustworthy.                                        Having risen to some
small height withoul
Niccolo Machiavelli, 1 46 9- 1 5 2 7
any kind o[support,
she shol forth her
flimsy branches to a
very uncomnwn und
KEYS TO POWER
super(uous lengI";
The ultmate power is the power to get people to do as you wish. When you
calling on her neigh­
can do this without having to force people or hurt them, when they will­
hour 10 lake notice how
ingly grant you what you desire, then your power is untouchable. The best       !iule she wunled his
assislance. "Poor injll­
way to achieve this position is to create a relationship of dependence. The
uated shrub, " replied
master requires your services; he is weak, or unable to fnction without
the elm, "how inconsis­
you; you have enmeshed yourself in his work so deeply that doing away           tent is thy conduct!
with you would bring hir great difficulty, or at least would mean valuable      Wouldsl tho/l he truly
independent, Ilwu
time lost in taining aother to replace you. Once such a relationship is es­
shouldsl carefully
tablished you have the upper hand, the leverage to make the master do as
apply those juices to
you wish. It is the classic case of the man behind the throne, the servant of   Ihe enlargement of Ihy
te king who actualy contols the king. Bismarc did not have to bully ei­         stem, which thou
lavishest in vain upon
ther Frederick or William into doing his bidding. He simply made it clear
unnecessary j(,!iag!'. J
tat unless he got what he wated he would walk away, leaving the king to
shortly shall hehold
twist in te wind. Both kings soon danced tn Bismarck's tune.                    thee grovelling on the
Do not be one of the many who mistakenly believe that the ultmate               ground; yet ('ountc­
nanced, indeerl, hy
form  of power is independence. Power involves  a relatonship between
many of the human
people; you will always need others as allies, pawns, or even as weak mas­
race, who, intoxicated
ters who serve as your front. The completely independent man would live         wilh vanilY, have
in a cabin in the woods-he would have the freedom to come and go as he          despised economy; and
wh", to supporl for a
pleased, but he would have no power. The best you can hope for is that
moment their emply
others will grow so dependent on you that you enjoy a kind of reverse in­
hoast of independence,
dependence: Their need for you frees you.                                       have exhausted Ihe
Louis XI ( 1423-1483), the great Spider King of France, had a weak­             verv so/ace ofit in friv­
ohms expenses. "
ness for astology. He kept a court astrologer whom he admired, until one
FAHLES,
day the ma predicted that a lady of the court would die within eight days.
ROBERT DODSLFY,
Wen the prophecy came tue,                                                      Luis was terrified, thinking that either the                             1 703- 1 764
man had murdered the woma to prove his accuracy or that he was so
versed in his science that his powers threatened Louis hirself In either
case he had to be killed.
One evening Louis summoned the atologer to his room, high in the
castle. Before the ma arrived, the king told his servants that when he gave
LAW 1 1                                                                         85

the signal they were to pick the astrologer up, carry him to the window,
and hurl him to the ground, hundreds of feet below.
The  astrologer soon arrived, but before giving the signal, Louis de
cided to ask him one last queston: "You clam to understand astology and
to know te fate of others, so tell me what your fate will be and how long
you have to live."
"I shall die just tree days before Your Majesty," the astrologer replied.
The king's signal was never given. The man's life was spared. The Spider
King not only protected bis astrologer for as long as he was aive, he lav­
ished him with gifts and had him tended by the finest court doctors.
The astologer survived Louis by several years, disproving his power
of prophecy but proving his mastery of power.
This is the model: Make others dependent on you. To    get rid of you
might spell disaster, even death, and your master dares not tempt fate by
finding out. There are many ways to  obtain such a positon.  Foremost
among them is to possess a talent and creative skill that simply cannot be
replaced.
During the Renaissance, the major obstacle to a painter's success was
finding the right patron. Michelangelo did tis better than anyone else: His
paton was Pope Julius H. But he and the pope quarreled over the building
of te pope's marble tomb, and Michelagelo lef Rome in disgust. To   the
amazement of tose in the pope's circle, not only did the pope not fire him,
he sought him out and in his own haughty way begged the artist to stay.
Michelangelo, he knew, could find another paton, but he could never find
another Michelagelo.
You do not have to have the talent of a Michelangelo; you do have to
have a skill that sets you apart fom the crowd. You should create a situa­
ton in which you can always latch on to anoter master or paton but your
master cannot easily find anoter servant with your particular talent. And
if, in reait, you ae not actualy indispensable, you must find a way to
make it look as if you are. Having the appearance of specialized knowledge
and skill gives you leeway in your ability to deceive those above you into
thinkng they cannot do without you. Real dependence on your master's
part, however, leaves him more vulnerable to you than the faked variety,
and it is always within your power to make your skill indispensable.
This is what is meant by the intertining of fates: Like creeping ivy,
you have wrapped yourself around the source of power, so that it would
cause great trauma to cut you away. And you do not necessaily have to en­
twine yourself around the master; another person will do, as long as he or
she too is indispensable i te chain.
One day Harry Cohn, president of Columbia Pictures, was visited in
his office by a gloomy group of his executives. It was 1951, when the witch­
hunt aganst Communists in Hollywood, carried on by the U.S. Congress's
House Un-American Actvities Committee, was at its height. The execu­
tives had bad news: One of their employees, te screenwriterJohn Howard
Lawson, had been singled out as a Communist. They had to get rid of him
right away or suffer the wrath of the committee.
86                                                                             LAW 1 1

Harry Cohn was no bleeding-heart liberal; in fact, he had always been
a die-hard Republican.
His favorite politcian was Benito Mussolini, whom he had once vis­
ited, and whose framed photo hung on his wall. If there was someone he
hated Cohn would cal him a "Communist bastard. "  But to the executves'
aazement Cohn told them he would not fire Lawson. He did not keep the
screenwriter on because he was a good writer-there were many good
writers  in  Hollywood. He kept hir because of a chain  of dependence:
Lawson was Humphrey Bogat's writer and Bogart was Columbia's star. If
Cohn messed with Lawson he would ruin a immensely profitable rela­
tionship. That was worth more than te terrible publicity brought to hir
by his defiance of the committee.
Henry Kissinger managed to survive the many bloodlettngs that went
on in the Nixon White House not because he was the best diplomat Nixon
could find-there were other fine negotators-ad not because the two
men got along so well: They did not. Nor did they share their beliefs and
politcs.  Kissinger  survived because  he  entenched  hirself in  so  many
areas  of the political structure that to  do away with hir  would  lead to
chaos. Michelagelo's power was intensive, depending on one skilI, his abil­
ity as  an  artst;  Kissinger's was  extensive. He got  hirself involved  in  so
may aspects and departments of the administation that his involvement
became  a card  in  his  hand.  It also  made  hir many allies.  If you can
arrange   such   a   position   for   yourself,   gettng   rid   of   you   becomes
dagerous-all sorts of interdependencies will unravel. Stll, the intensive
form of power provides more feedom than the extensive, because those
who  have  it  depend  on  no particular master,  or particular position  of
power, for their security.
To    make  others dependent on you,  one route to take is the  secret­
intelligence tactc. By knowing other people's secrets, by holding informa­
tion that they wouldn't want broadcast, you seal your fate with theirs. You
ae untouchable. Ministers of secret police have held this position through­
out the ages: They can make or break a king, or, as in the case of J. Edgar
Hoover, a president. But the role is so                                               f    of insecurites and paranoia that
te power it provides almost cancels itself out. You cannot rest at ease, and
what good is power if it brings you no peace?
One last waming: Do not imagine that your master's dependence on
you will make him love you. In fact, he may resent and fear you. But, as
Machiavelli said, it is better to be feared tha loved. Fear you can contol;
love, never. Depending on an emotion as subtle and chageable as love or
fiendship will only make you insecure. Better to have others depend on
you out of fear of the consequences of losing you tha out of love of your
company.
LAW 1 1                                                                               87

Image : Vines with Many Thors. Below, the roots grow deep
and wide. Above, the vines push through bushes, entwine themselves
around trees and poles and window ledges. To   get rid of them
would cost such toil and blood, it is easier to let them climb.
Autority: Make people depend on
you.  More  is  to  be  gained  from
such dependence than courtesy. He
who has slaked his thirst, immedi­
ately  turs  his  back  on  the  well,
no longer needing it. When depen­
dence  disappears,  so  does  civility
and   decency,   and   then   respect.
The  first lesson  which  experience
should teach you is  to  keep hope
aive  but  never  satisfied,  keeping
even a royal paton ever in need of
you.  (Baltasar Graciä,  1601- 1658)
REVERSAL
The weakness of making others depend on you is tat you ae in some
measure dependent on them. But trying to move beyond that point means
gettng rid of those above you-it means standing alone, depending on no
one. Such is the monopolistic drive of a J. P. Morgan or a John D. Rocke­
feller-to drive out all competiton, to be in complete control. If you can
corer the market, so much the better.
No such independence comes without a price. You are forced to isolate
yourself. Monopolies ofen tur inwad and destroy themselves from te in­
tera pressure. They also stir up power                                           resent    ent, maing their ene­
mies bond together to fight them. The drive for complete control is ofen
ruinous ad fruitless. Interdependence remains the law, independence a
rare and often fatal excepton. Better to place yourself in a position of mu­
tual dependence, then, ad to follow this critical law rather than look for its
reversa. You will not have the unbearable pressure ofbeing on top, and te
master above you will in essence be your slave, for he will depend on you.
88                                                                               LAW 1 1

LAW
12
USE SELECTIVE HONESTY
AND GENEROSITY TO
DISARM YOUR VICTIM
JUDGMENT
One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of
dishonest ones.  Open-hearted gestures of   honesty and
genersit bng down the guard of even the most suspi­
cious peopl. Once your selctive honesty oens a hol in
their armor you can deceive and manipulate them at
will. A timely gJt-a Trojan horse-will serve the same
purpose.
89

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Sometime in 1926, a t, dapperly dressed man paid a visit to A Capone,
I I !                                                                          \\CI ,( () IHII!IU
the most feared gangster of his tme. Speaking with an elegant Continenta
COI  H'I II·.I! CI I \IU.\I.\ \
accent, the man intoduced hirself as Count Victor Lustg. He promised
Frances('o Gillseppe
Borri of Milan, w!lOse                                                         that if Capone gave hir $50,000 he could double it. Capone had more
dealh in 1695 fdl iu.w                                                         than enough fnds to cover the "investment," but he wasn't in te habit of
wilhin Ihe sevenleenl"                                                         entrustng large sums to total strangers. He looked the count over: Some­
cenlury . . . was a j(Jre-
                                                                               thing about the man was different-his classy style, his manner-and so
runner of Ihm special
Iype ofcharlalanical                                                           Capone decided to play along.  He counted out te bills personally and
"dven/urer, fhe ('our-                                                         handed them to Lustg. "Okay, Count," said Capone. "Double it in sixty
tier or "('avalier "
days like you sad." Lustig lef with the money, put it in a safe-deposit box
imposlor                                                                       llis r"al
in Chicago, then headed to New York, where he had several oter money­
period ofKlory heKan
making schemes i progress.
afier he moved 10
Amslerdam. Thcre he                                                            The $50,000 remained in te bank box untouched. Lustig made no ef­
assllmed Ihe litle oI
fort to double it. Two months later he retumed to Chicago, took te money
Medico Universale,
from te box, and paid Capone another visit. He looked at the gangster's
nlaintained a grea!
relinue, and drove                                                                                                                                            stony-faced bodyguads, smiled apologetically, and said, "Please accept my
ahoul in a coach with                                                                                                                                         profound regrets, Mr. Capone. l'm sorry to report tat the plan faled . . . 1
six I!orsc.\'                                                                  Patient..'
failed."
slreamed /()  him, and
Capone slowly stood up. He glowered at Lustig, debatng which part
some invalids had
Ihemselves carried in                                                          of the river to throw hir in. But the count reaced into his coat pocket,
sedan ('hairs all the way                                                      withdrew te $50,000, and placed it on te desk. "Here, sir, is your money,
/rom Pa ris /() his pla('<,
to  the  penny. Again, my  sincere  apologies.  This is  most embarrasing.
in A mslerdam, Rorri
thought they would. 1 would have loved                                         Things didn't work out te way 1
look 110 payment f'''
his ('o/1sllllaliolls: He                                                      to have doubled your money for you ad for myself-Lord knows 1 need
dislrihuled Kn'al sllms                                                        it-but the plan just didn't materialize."
a/llollK Ife poor afl(1
Capone sagged back into his chair, confsed. "I know you're a con
was never kf10wn 10
man, Count," said Capone. "I knew it the moment you walked i here. 1
receive any rnol1ey
IhrouKh Ihe posl or                                                            expected eiter one hundred tousad dollars or nothing. But tis . . .  get­
hills ofexchange. As he                                                        tng my money back .  .  .  well." "Agan my apologies, Mr. Capone," said
('ontilllled 10 live with
Lustg, as he picked up his hat and began to leave. "My God! You're hon­
such splendor. never­
est!" yelled Capone. "If you're on the spot, here's five to help you aong."
Iheless. il was presllmed
thaI fe possessed Ife                                                          He  counted  out five  one-thousand-dollar bills  out of the  $50,000. The
philosophers' slone.                                                           count seemed stunned, bowed deeply, mumbled his thanks, and lef, tak­
Suddenly Ifis hellcfilc­
ing the money.
lor di.mppearei! li'mn
The $5,000 was what Lustig had been after all along.
A mslerdatll. The/1 il
was discoverel! Ihal he
had laken wilh "im                                                             Interpretation
rloney ami diamollds
                                                                               Count Victor Lustg, a man who spoke several languages ad prided him­
thaI IU/d han pilced
in his charge.                                                                 self on his refinement and culture, was one of the great con artsts of mod­
'1'11 1', POWLR O!                                                             em  tmes.  He  was  known for  his  audacity,  his  fealessness,  and,  most
rllF CHJRLAL\N,                                                                importat, his knowledge of huma psychology. He could size up a man in
GRi'TE D'  FRAM'['SCO,
1939                                                                           minutes, discovering his weaknesses, and he had radar for suckers. Lustig
knew that most men build up defenses aganst crooks and other touble­
makers. The con atist's job is to bring those defenses down.
One sure way to do tis is through an act of apparent sincerity and
honest. Who will distrust a person literally caught in the act of being hon-
90                                                                             LAW 12

est? Lustig used selectve honesty many times, but with Capone he went a
step frther. No normal con man would have dared such a con; he would
have chosen his suckers for their meekness, for that look about them that
says they will take their medicine without complaint. Con Capone ad you
would spend the  rest  of your  life  (whatever remaned  of it)  afraid.  But
Lustig understood that a man like Capone spends his life rlistrusting oth­
ers. No one around hir is honest or generous, and being so much in the
company of wolves is  exhausting,  even  depressing. A man like  Capone
yea                                                                                 s to be the recipient of an honest or generous gesture, to feel that not
everyone has a angle or is out to rob hir.
Lustig's act of selectve honesty disarmed Capone because it was so
unexpected. A con artst loves conflicting emotions like tese, since the
person caught up in them is so easily distracted and deceived.
Do not shy away fom practcing this law on the Capones of the world.
With a well-tmed gesture of honesty or generosity, you will have the most
bruta ad cynical beast in the kingdom eatng out of your hand.
Everything turs gray when I don 't have at least one mark on the horizon.
Lie then seems empty and depressing. I cannot understand honest men.
The lead desperate lives, full of boredom.
CO/IIII " iror j,nl/ig,                                                             /891J- / ' 7
KEYS TO  POWER
The essence o f  deception i s  distracton. Distactng the people you want to
deceive gives you the tme and space to do something they won't notice,
A act of kindness, generosity, or honest is often the most powerfl form
of distraction because it disarms other people's suspicions, It turs them
into children, eagerly lapping up any kind of affectonate gesture.
In ancient China this was called "giving before you take"-the giving
maes it hard for the other person to notce the taking. It is a device with
infinite practcal uses. Brazenly taking something from someone is danger­
ous, even for the powerfl. The victim will plot revenge, It is also danger­
ous simply to ask for what you need, no matter how politely: Unless the
other person sees some gan for themselves, they may come to resent your
neediness. Lea                                                                      to give before you take. It sofens the ground, takes the
bite out of a fture request, or simply creates a distracton. And the giving
ca take many forms: an actual gift, a generous act, a kind favor, an "hon­
est" admission-whatever it takes,
Selectve honest is best employed on your first encounter with some­
one. We   are all creatures of habit, and our first impressions last a long time.
If someone believes you are honest at the start of your relationship it takes
a lot to convince them otherwise. This gives you room to maneuver.
Jay  Gould,  like A  Capone,  was  a man  who  distusted  everyone.
By  the  time  he  was   thirty-three   he   was   already  a  multmillionaire,
mostly through decepton and strong-arming. In the late 1860s, Gould in­
vested heavily in the Erle Railroad, then discovered that the maket had
LAW 1 2                                                                             91

been flooded wit a vast amount o f phony stock certficates for the com­
pany. He stood to lose a fortne and to suff er a lot of embarrassment.
In the midst of this crlsis, a man named LordJohn Gordon-Gordon of­
fered to help.  Gordon- Gordon,  a Scottish lord, had  apparendy made a
small fortune investng in railroads.
By  hirlng  some  handwriting  exerts · Gordon-Gordon  was  able  to
prove to Gould tat the culprlts for te phony stoc certficates were actu­
ally several top executives with te Erle Railroad itself. Gould was gratefl.
Gordon-Gordon ten proposed that he ad Gould join forces to buy up a
controlling interest i Erle.  Gould  agreed. For a while the venture  ap­
peared to prosper. The two men were now good fiends, and every time
Gordon-Gordon  came  to  Gould  asking  for  money  to  buy  more  stock,
Gould   gave   it  to                                                          h.  In                           1873,  however,  Gordon-Gordon  suddenly
dumped all of his stock, maing a fortune but drastically lowering the value
of Gould's own holdings. Then he disappeared fom sight.
Upon investigaton, Gould found out that Gordon-Gordon's real name
was John Crowningsfield, and that he was the bastard son of a merchant
seaman ad a London barmaid. There had been may clues before then
tat Gordon-Gordon was a con ma, but his inita act of honesty and sup­
port had so blinded Gould that it took te loss of millions for hir to see
through te scheme.
A single act of honesty is often not enough. What is required is a repu­
tation for honesty, built on a serles of acts                                  but tese can be quite inconse­
quenta. Once tis reputaton is established, as with first impressions, it is
hard to shae.
In ancient China, Duke Wu    of CMng decided it was time to tae over
te increasingly powerfl kingdom of Hu. Telling no one of his plan, he
married his daughter to Hu's roler. He then called a council and asked his
ministers, "I am considering a military ca                                     pagn. Which country should
we invade?" A he had expected, one of his ministers replied, "Hu should
be invaded." The duke seemed agry, and said, "Hu is a sister state now.
Why do you suggest invading her?" He had te minister executed for his
impolitc remak. The ruler of Hu heard about this, and considerlng oter
tokens of Wu's honesty and te marriage with his daughter, he took no pre­
cautions to defend hirself from Cheng. A few weeks later, Cheng forces
swept trough Hu ad took the country, never to relinquish it.
Honesty is one of the best ways to disarm the wary, but it is not te
only one. Any kind of noble, appaendy selfless act will serve. Perhaps the
best such act, thoug, is one of generosit. Few people can resist a gUt, even
fom te most hardened enemy, which is why it is ofen the perfect way to
disarm people. A gif brings out the child in                                   u                                ,  instandy lowerlng our de­
fenses. Although we ofen view oter people's actons in te most cynica
light, we rarely see the Machiavellia element of a gift, which quite ofen
hides ulterlor motves. A                                                       g                                is te perfect object in whic to hide a decep­
tve move.
Over three thousand years ago te acient Greeks traveled across the
sea to recaptre te beautfl Helen, stolen away fom them by Paris, ad
92                                                                             LAW 1 2

to destroy Paris's cit, Troy. The siege lasted ten years, many heroes died,
yet neither side had come elose to victory. One day, the prophet Calchas
assembled the Greeks.
"Stop battering away at these walls!" he told them.  "You must find
some   oter  way,  some                                                                                                                              ruse. We  cannot take
Troy by force alone. We                                                       I m a g e :  T h e                                                     must find some cunning
stratager . "    The   cun-                                                   Troj an Horse.                                                         ning  Greek   leader
Odysseus then came up                                                         Y0 u r  g u i l e  i s                                                 with the idea of building
a  giant  wooden   horse,                                                     hidden inside                                                          hiding soldiers inside it,
then  offering it  to  the                                                    a  magnificen t                                                        Troj ans  as  a  gift.
Neoptolemus,   son   of                                                       gift that proves                                                       Achilles, was disgusted
with  this  idea;  it  was                                                    irresistible to                                                        unmanly.  Better  for
thousands to  die  on the                                                     YOUf opponent.                                                         battlefield than to gain
victory   so  deceitfully.                                                    The walls open.                                                        But the soldiers, faced
with a choice between                                                         Once inside,    another ten years of
manliness, honor, and                                                         wreak  havoc.                                                          death, on the one hand
and  a  quick  victory  on                                                                                                                           the other, chose the
horse, which was promptly built. The trick was successfl and Troy fell.
One gif did more for the Greek cause than ten years of fightng.
Selectve kindness should also be pat of your arsenal of decepton. For
years the ancient Romans had besieged te city of the Faliscans, always un­
successflly. One day, however, when the Roman genera Camillus was
encamped outside the city, he suddenly saw a man leading some cildren
toward hir. The man was a Falisca teacher, ad the children, it tured
out, were the sons and daughters of the noblest and wealthiest citizens of
the town. On the pretense of taking these children out for a walk, he had
led them straight to the Romas, offering them as hostages in hopes of in­
gratatng hirself with Camillus, the city's enemy.
Camillus did not take the children hostage. He stipped the teacher,
tied his hads behind his bac, gave each child a rod, and let them whip
h                                                                             all the way back to the city. The gesture had an immediate effect on
the Faiscans. Had Camillus used te children as hostages, some in the cit
would have voted to surrender. And even i the Faliscans had gone on
fghtng, their resistace would have been hafhearted. Ca                        illus's refsa to
tae advantage of the sitaton broke down the Faliscans' resistance, ad
tey surrendered. The general had caculated correctly. And in any case he
had had nothing to lose: He knew that the hostage ploy would not have
ended the wa, at least not right away. By tu                                  ing the situaton around, he
ea                                                                            ed his enemy's trust and respect, disarming them.  Slectve kindness
wll ofen break down even the most stbbor foe :  Aiming right for the
heat, it corrodes the will to fight back.
Remember: By playing on people's emotons, calculated acts of kind­
ness can tur a Capone into a gullible child. As wit ay emotona ap­
proach, the tactc must be practiced with cauton: If people see through it,
teir disappointed feelings of grattude ad warmth will become the most
violent hatred and distust. Unless you can make the gesture seem sincere
and  heartfelt, do not play with fire.
LAW 12                                                                        93

Authority: When Duke Hsien
of Chin was about to raid Yü,
he presented to them a jade
and a team of horses. When
Earl Chih was about to raid
Ch'ou-yu,  he  presented  to
them grand chariots. Hence
the saying:  "When you are
about  to  take,  you  should
give."                                                                             (Han-fei-tzu, Chinese
philosopher, third century B.C.)
REVERSAL
When you have a history of deceit behind you, no amount ofhonesty, gen­
erosity, or kindness will fool people. In fact it will only cal attention to it­
self. Once people have come to see you as deceitful, to act honest al of a
sudden is simply suspicious. In these cases it is better to play the rogue.
Count Lustg, pulling te biggest con of his caeer, was about to sell
the Eiffel Tower to a unsuspecting industriaist who believed the govern­
ment was auctoning it off for scrap metal. The industiaist was prepared
to hand over a huge sum of money to Lustig, who had successfly imper­
sonated a goverment official. A te last minute, however, te mark was
suspicious. Someting about Lustg botered hir. At the meeting in which
he was to hand over te money, Lustig sensed his sudden distust.
Leaning over to te industrialist, Lustig explained, in a low whisper,
how low his salay was, how difficult his finances were, on and on. After a
few minutes of this, te industialist reaized tat Lustig was asking for a
bribe. For the first time he relaxed. Now he knew he could tust Lustig:
Since all goverment officias were dishonest, Lustig had to be real. The
man forked over te money. By acting dishonest, Lustg seemed te real
McCoy. In this case selective honesty would have had the opposite effect.
As te French diplomat Talleyrand grew older, his reputaton as a mas­
ter liar and deceiver spread. At te  Congress of Vienna ( 1814-1815), he
would spin fabulous stories and make impossible remarks to people who
knew he had to be lying. His dishonesty had no purpose except to cloak
te moments when he realy was deceiving tem. One day, for example,
among friends, Taleyrand sad wit apparent sincerity,  "In business one
ought to show one's hand." No one who head                                         h                       could believe their
ears: A man who never  once in his life had shown his cards was telling
oter people to show teirs. Tactics like this made it impossible to distin­
guish Taleyrand's real deceptons fom his fae  ones. By embracing his
reputation for dishonesty, he preserved his ability to deceive.
Notng in te ream of power is set in stone. Overt deceptiveness will
sometimes cover YOU tracks, even making you admired for the honesty of
your dishonesty.
94                                                                                 LAW 1 2

LAW
13
WHEN ASKING FOR HELP,
APPEAL TO PEOPLE'S
SE LF-INTEREST ,
NEVER TO THEIR MERCY
OR GRATITUDE
JUDGMENT
Iyou need to tur lo an allyJor help, do not bother to re­
mind him oJ your past assistance and good deeds. He
will find a way  to ignore you. Instead, uncover some­
thing in your request, or in your alliance with him, that
will benit him, and emphasize it out oJ all proportion.
He will respond enthusiastically when he sees something
to be gainedJor himsel.
95

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In te early fourteent century, a young man named Castruccio Castacani
TI JE  I ' E A S A " T  A I Il
rose fom the rank of common soldier to become lord of te great city of
'1'1 1 1':  A P I'                                                                U                                                                           :-THEE
Lucca, Italy. One of te most powerfl families in the city, the Poggios,
A peasant had in his
had been instrumental in his climb (which succeeded trough teachery
garden an apple-tree,
which bore no Jruit, but                                                          ad bloodshed), but afer he came to power, they came to feel he had for­
only served as a perch                                                            gotten them. His ambition outweighed any gratitude he feh. In 1325, while
Jor the sparrows and
Castuccio wa away fighting Lucca's main riva, Florence, the Poggios
grasshoppers. He
conspired wit other noble families in the cit to rid themselves of this
resolved to cut it down,
and, taking his ax in                                                             troublesome and ambitous prince.
hand, made a bold                                                                 Mountng an insurrecton, the plotters ataced and murdered the gov­
stroke at its roots. The
                                                                                  emor whom Castruccio had left behind to rule the city. Riots broke out,
grasshoppers and spar­
rows entreated hir not                                                            and te Catccio supporters and te Pogio supporters were poised to do
to cut down the tree                                                              batte. At te height of te tension, however, Stefao di Poggio, the oldest
that sheltered them, but                                                          member of te faily, intervened, ad made bot sides lay down their
to spare it, and they
arms.
would sing to hir and
A peaceful man, Stefao had not taken part in the conspiracy. He had
fighten his labors. He
paid no attention to                                                              told his faily it would end in a useless bloodbat. Now he insisted he
their request, but gave
should intercede on te family's behalf and persuade Castruccio to listen to
the tree a second and a
their complaints and satsf their demads. Stefano was the oldest and wis­
third blow with his ax.
est member of te clan, ad h family agreed to put their trust in his diplo­
When he reached the
hol/ow oJ the tree, he                                                            macy rather tan in their weapons.
Jound a hive Juli oJ
When news of the rebellion reached Castruccio, he hurried bac t
honey. Having tasted
Lucca. By the tme he arrived, however, the fightng had ceased, through
the honeycomb, he
threw down his ax, and,                                                           Stefano's agency, and he was surprised by the city's calm and peace. Ste­
looking on the tree as                                                            fano di Poggio had imagined that Castuccio would be gratefl to              h                                         for
sacred, took great care
his part in quelling the rebellion, so he paid the prince a visit. He explained
oJ it.
how he had brought peace, then begged for Castruccio's mercy. He said
Self-interest alone
moves some men.                                                                   tat the rebels in his family were young and impetuous, hungry for power
FABLES,                                                                           yet inexperienced; he recaled his                                           fy's past generosity to Castruccio.
AESOP.                                                                            For a tese reasons, he said, the great prince should pardon te Poggios
SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
and listen to teir complaints. This, he said, was the only just thing to do,
since the family had willingly laid down teir arms and had aways sup­
ported him.
Castuccio listened patently. He seemed not te slightest bit agry or
resentl. Instead, he told Stefano to rest assured that justce would preval,
and he asked him to bring his entire family to te paace to talk over teir
grievances ad come to an agreement. As tey took leave of one anoter,
Castruccio said he tanked God for the chance he had been given to show
his clemency and kindness. That evening te entire Poggio family came to
te paace. Castuccio immediately had them imprisoned ad a few days
later all were executed, including Stefao.
Interpretation
Stefano di Poggio is te embodiment of al those who believe that the jus­
tce ad nobilit of their cause                                                     w                                                                           prevail. Certainly appeals t justice ad
gratitude have occasionaly succeeded in the past, but more often than not
96                                                                                LAW 13

they have had dire consequences, especially in dealings with the Castuc­
cios of the world. Stefano knew that the prince had risen to power through
Most men are so thor·
teachery ad ruthlessness. This was a ma, after all, who had put a elose
oughly subjective that
ad devoted friend to death. When Castruccio was told that it had been a         nothing real/y interests
terrible wrong to kill such an old friend, he replied that he had executed      them but themselves.
They always think of
not an old fiend but a new enemy.
their own case as  soon
A man like Castruccio knows only force and self-interest. When the re­
as ever any remark is
bellion began, to end it and place oneself at his mercy was the most dan­       made, and their whole
attention is engrossed
gerous possible move. Even once Stefao di Poggio had made that fatal
and absorbed by the
mistke, however, he still had options: He could have offered money to
merest chance refer­
Castruccio, could have made promises for the future, could have pointed         ence to anything which
out what the Poggios could still contribute to Castruccio's power-their in­     affects them persona/ly,
fuence with the most influential families of Rome, for example, and the         be it never so remote.
A RTHUR
great marriage they could have brokered.
SCHOPENHAUER,
Instead Stefano brought up the past, and debts that caried no obliga­           1788-1860
ton. Not only is a man not obliged to be grateful, gratitude is ofen a terri­
ble burden that he gladly discards. And in this case Castruccio rid himself
ofhis obligations to the Poggios by eliminating the Poggios.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 433 B.C., just before the Peloponnesian War, the island of Corcyra (later
called Corf) and the Greek city-state of Corinth stood on the brink of con­
flict. Both partes sent ambassadors to Athens to ty to                          w                          over the Atheni­
as to their side. The stakes were high, since whoever had Athens on his
side was sure to win. And whoever won the war would certainly give the
defeated side no mercy.
Corcyra spoke first. Its ambassador began by admitting that the island
had never helped Athens before, and in fact had allied itself with Athens's
enemies. There were no tes of friendship or gratitude between Corcyra
and Athens. Yes, the ambassador admitted, he had come to Athens now
out of fear and concer for Corcyra's saety. The only thing he could offer
was an alliance of mutual interests. Corcyra had a navy only surpassed in
size and strength by Athens's own; an alliance between the two states
would create a formidable force, one that could intimidate the riyal state of
Spata. That, unfortunately, was all Corcyra had to offer.
The representative from Corinth then gave a brilliant, passionate
speech, in sharp contrast to the dry, colorless approac of the Corcyran.
He talked of everything Corinth had done for Athens in the past. He asked
how it would look to Athens's other allies if the city put a agreement with
a  former enemy over one with a present friend, one that had served
Atens's interest loyally: Perhaps those allies would break their agreements
wit Athens if they saw that their loyalty was not valued. He referred to
Hellenic law, and the need to repay Corinth for all its good deeds. He fi­
naly went on to list the may services Corinth had performed for Athens,
ad the importance of showing grattude to one's friends.
After the speech, the Athenians debated the issue in an assembly. On
LAW 13                                                                          97

te second round, tey voted overwhelmingly to ally with Corcyra ad
drop Corinth.
Interpretation
History has remembered te Atenians nobly, but they were te preemi­
nent realists of classical Greece. With them, all te rhetoric, all the emo­
tional appeals in the world, could not match a good pragmatc agument,
especially one tat added to their power.
What the Corinthia ambassador did not realize was that his refer­
ences to Corinth's past generosity to Atens only irritated te Athenians,
subty asking them to feel guilty ad puttng them under obligation. The
Atenians couldn't care less about past favors ad friendly feelings. A te
same tme, tey knew tat if teir other allies tought tem ungratefl for
abandoning Corint, these city-states would stll be unlikely to break their
tes to Atens, the preeminent power in Greece. Atens ruled its empire by
force, and would simply compel any rebellious ally to retur to the fold.
When people choose between tak about te past ad tak about the
fture, a pragmatic person will always opt for te fture and forget the past.
As te Corcyrans realized, it is always best to speak pragmatically to a
pragmatc person. And in the end, most people are in fact pragmatic-they
will rarely act aganst their own self-interest.
I has always been a ruZe that the weak should be subject to the strong;
and besides, we consider that we are worthy of our powe. Up tilZ the
present moment you, too, used to think that we were; but now, after
calculating your own interest, you are begnning to talk in terms of right
and wrong. Considerations of this kind have never yet turned people aside
from the opportunities of agandizement offered by superior strength.
Athenian representative to Sparta,
quoted in The Peloponnesian War,  Thucydides, c. 465-395 B. r;.
KEYS TO POWER
In your quest for power, you                                                  w         constanty find yourself in te position of
asking for help fom those more powerfl tan you. There is an art to ask­
ing for help, an                                                              a         that depends on your ability to understand te person
you are dealing with, and to not confse your needs wit teirs.
Most people never  succeed at this, because they are completely
trapped in their own wants and desires. They start fom the asumpton
that te people they are appealing to have a selfless interest in helping
tem. They talk as i their needs mattered to these people-who probably
couldn't care less. Sometimes tey refer t larger issues: a great cause, or
grand emotions such as love and gratitude. They go for te big picture
when simple, everyday realities would have much more appeal. What they
do not realize is that even the most powerfl person is locked inside needs
of his own, and tat i you mae no appea to his self-interest, he merely
sees you as desperate or, at best, a waste of tme.
98                                                                            LAW 1 3

In the sixteenth century, Portuguese missionaries tried for years to con­
vert the people ofJapan to Catholicism, while at the same time Portuga
had a monopoly on tade between Japan and Europe. Although the mis­
sionaries did have some success, they never got far among the ruling elite;
by te begnning of the seventeenth century, in fact, their proselytzing had
completely antagonized the Japanese emperor Ieyasu. When the Dutch
began to arrive in Japan in great numbers, Ieyasu was much relieved. He
needed Europeans for their know-how in guns and navigaton, ad here at
last were Europeans who cared nothing for spreading religion-the Dutch
wated only to trade. Ieyasu swiftly moved to evict the Portuguese. From
then on, he would only deal with the practical-minded Dutc.
Japan and Holland were vastly different cultures, but each shared a
tmeless and universal concer: self-interest. Every person you deal with is
like another culture, an alien lad with a past that has nothing to do with
yours. Yet you ca bypass the differences between you ad hir by appeal­
ing to his selfinterest. Do not be subtle: You have valuable knowledge to
share, you will fill his coffers with gold, you will mae hir live longer and
happier. This is a laguage that all of us speak ad understand.
A key step in the process is to understand the other person's psychol­
ogy. Is he vain ? Is he concered about his reputaton or his social standing?
Does he have enemies you could help hir vaquish? Is he simply moti­
vated by money and power?
When the MongoIs invaded China in the twelfh century, they threat­
ened to  obliterate a culture that had thrived for over two thousad years.
Their leader,  Genghis Khan, saw nothing in  China but  a country that
lacked pasturing for his horses, and he decided to destoy the place, level­
ing all its cites, for "it would be better to exterminate the Chinese ad let
te grass grow." It was not a soldier, a general, or a king who saved the
Chinese from devastaton, but a man named Yelu Ch'u-Ts'ai. A foreigner
hirself, Ch'u-Ts'ai had come to appreciate the superiority of Chinese cul­
tre. He managed to make hirself a tusted adviser to Genghis Khan, and
persuaded hir that he would reap riches out of the place if, instead of de­
stroying it, he simply taxed everyone who lived there. Khan saw the wis­
dom in this ad did as Ch'u-Ts'ai advised.
When Khan took the city of Kaifeng, aer a long siege, and decided to
massacre its inhabitants (as he had in other cites that had resisted hir),
Ch'u-Ts'ai told hir that the finest crasmen ad engineers in China had
fed to Kaifeng, and it would be better to put them to  use.  Kaifeng was
spared. Never before had Genghis Khan  shown such mercy,  but then it
realy wasn't mercy that saved Kaifeng. Ch'u-Ts'ai knew Khan weIl. He was
a barbaric peasat who cared nothing for culture, or indeed for anything
oter than warf are and practical results. Ch'u-Ts'ai chose to appeal to the
only emoton that would work on such a ma: greed.
Self-interest is the lever that will move people. Once you make them
see how you can in some way meet their needs or advance their cause,
teir resistance to your requests for help                                      w    magically fal away. At each
step on the way to acquiring power, you must tain yourself to think your
LAW 13                                                                         99

way inside the other person's mind, to see teir needs and interests, to get
rid of the screen of your own feelings that obscure te truth. Master this art
and there will be no limits to what you can accomplish.
Image: A Cord that
Binds. The cord of
mercy and grati­
tude is threadbare,
and will break at
the first shock.
Do not throw
such a lifeline.
The cord of
mutual self-inter­
est is woven of
many fibers and
cannot easily be
severed. It will serve
you weH for years.
Authority: The shortest and best way to make your for­
tune is to let people see clearly that it is in their interests
to promote yours. (Jean de La Bruyere,                                          1645-1696)
REVERSAL
Some people will see an appeal to their self-interest as ugly and ignoble.
They actually prefer to be able to exercise charity, mercy, and justice,
which are their ways of feeling superior to you: When you beg them for
help, you emphasize their power and position. They are strang enough to
need nothing fom you except the chance to feel superior. This is the wine
that intoxicates tem. They are dying to fnd your project, to introduce
you to powerfl people-provided, of course, that all this is done in public,
and for a good cause (usually the more public, the better). Not everyone,
then, ca be approached through cynical self-interest. Same people will be
put off by it, because they don't want to seem to be motvated by such
things. They need opportunities to display their good heat.
Da not be shy. Give them tat opporttinity. It's not as if you are con­
ning them by asking for help-it is really their pleasure to give, and to be
seen giving. You must distinguish the differences among powerfl people
and figure out what makes tem tick. When they ooze greed, da not appeal
to their charity. When they want to look charitable and noble, da not ap­
peal to their greed.
100                                                                             LAW 13

LAW
14
POSE AS A FRIEND ,
WORK AS A SPY
JUDGMENT
Knowing about your rival is crtical. Use spies to gather
valuabl inforation that will kee you a step    ahead.
Better still: Play the spy yoursel In polite social encoun­
ters, lar to prbe. Ask indirect questions to get peopl to
reveal their weaknesses and intentions. There is no occa­
sion that is not an oortunit for artul spying.
101

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Joseph Duveen was undoubtedly the greatest art dealer of his tme-fom
1904 to 1940 he almost single-handedly monopolized America's million­
aire art-collecting maket. But one prize plum eluded hir: the industrialist
Andrew Mellon. Before he died, Duveen was determined to make Mellon
a dient.
Duveen's friends said this was an impossible dream. Mellon was a stff,
tacitum man. The stories he had heard about the congenia, talkative Du­
veen rubbed hir the wrong way-he had made it dear he had no desire to
meet the man. Yet Duveen told his doubting friends, "Not only will Mellon
buy from me but he will buy only from me." For several years he tracked
his prey, leaming the man's habits, tastes, phobias. To   do this, he secretly
put several of Mellon's staff on his own payroll, worming valuable informa­
ton out of them. By the time he moved into action, he knew Mellon about
as well as Mellon's wife did.
In 1921 Mellon was visitng London, and staying in a palatal suite on
the third floor of Claridge's Hotel. Duveen booked hirself into the suite
just below Mellon's, on the second floor. He had aranged for his valet to
befriend Mellon's valet, and on the fatefl day he had chosen to make his
move, Mellon's valet told Duveen's valet, who told Duveen, that he had
just helped Mellon on with his overcoat, and that the industrialist was mak­
ing his way down the corridor to ring for the lift.
Duveen's valet hurriedly helped Duveen with his own overcoat. Sec­
onds later, Duveen entered the lif, and 10 ad behold, there was Mellon.
"How do you do, Mr. Mellon?" said Duveen, introducing hirself. "I a on
my way to the National Gallery to look at some pictures." How uncanny­
that was precisely where Mellon was headed. And so Duveen was able to
accompany his prey to the one locaton that would ensure his success. He
knew Mellon's taste inside and out, and while the two men wandered
through the museum, he dazzled the magnate with his knowledge. Once
again quite uncannily, they seemed to have remarkably similar tastes.
Mellon was pleasantly surprised: This was not the Duveen he had ex­
pected. The man was charming and agreeable, and dearly had exquisite
taste. When they retumed to New York, Mellon visited Duveen's exdusive
galery and fell in love with the collecton. Everything, surprisingly enough,
seemed to be precisely the kind of work he wanted to collect. For the rest
of his life he wa Duveen's best and most generous dient.
Interpretation
A man as ambitious and competitve as Joseph Duveen left nothing to
chance.                                                                          Wat's the point of winging it, of just hoping you may be able to
charm this or that dient? It's like shooting ducks blindfolded. Arm yourself
with a little knowledge and your aim improves.
Mellon was the most spectacular of Duveen's catches, but he spied on
many a millionare. By secretly putting members of his clients' household
staffs on his own payroll, he would gan constant access to valuable infor-
102                                                                              LAW 14

mation about their masters' comings and goings, changes in taste, and
other such tdbits of informaton that would put hir a step aead. A riyal
of Duveen's who wanted to make Henry Frick a dient notced that when­
ever he visited this wealthy New Yorker, Duveen was there before hir, as
if he had a sixth sense. To   other dealers Duveen seemed to be everywhere,
and to know everying before they did. His powers discouraged and dis­
heartened them, until many simply gave up going aer the wealthy dients
who could make a dealer rich.
Such is the power of artl spying: It makes you seem al-powerfl,
clairvoyant. Your knowledge of your mark can also make you seem charm­
ing, so well can you antcipate his desires. No one sees the source of your
power, and what they canot see they cannot fight.
Rulers see through spies, as cows through smell, Brahmins through
scrptures and the rest 01 the people through their normal ees.
Kautilya, Indian philosopher, third antury B. C.
KEYS TO POWER
In the realm ofpower, your goal is a degree of control over fture events.
Part of the problem you face, then, is that people won't tell you all their
thoughts, emotions, and plas. Contolling what they say, they ofen keep
the most critcal parts of their character hidden-their weaknesses, ulterior
motves, obsessions. The result is that you canot predict their moves, ad
are constantly in the dark. The tc is to find a way to probe them, to find
out their secrets and hidden intentions, without lettng them know what
you are up to.
This is not as difficult as you might think. A friendly front will let you
secretly gather information on friends ad enemies aike. Let others con­
sult the horoscope, or read taot cards: You have more concrete means of
seeing into the future.
The most common way of spying is to use other people, as Duveen
did. The method is simple, powerfl, but risky: You will certainly gather in­
formaton, but you have little control over the people who are doing the
work. Perhaps they will ineptly reveal your spying, or even secretly tur
against you. It is far better to be the spy yourself, to pose as a friend while
secretly gathering information.
The French politician Talleyrad was one of the greatest practitioners
of this art. He had an uncanny ability to worm secrets out of people in po­
lite conversaton. A contemporary of his, Baron de Vitrolles, wrote, "Wit
and grace maked his conversation. He possessed the art of concealing his
toughts or his malice beneath a transparent veil of insinuations, words
that imply something more than they express. Only when necessary did he
inject his own personality." The key here is Talleyrand's ability to suppress
himself in the conversaton, to make others talk endlessly about themselves
and inadvertently reveal their intentions and plans.
LAW 14                                                                            1 03

Throughout Taleyrand's life, people sad he was a superb conversa­
tonalist-yet he actualy sad very litde. He never talked about his own
Ifyou have reason to
ideas; he got others to reveal theirs. He would organize fiendly gaes of
suspect that a person is
telling you a lie, look as                                                      charades for foreign diplomats,  social  gatherings where,  however, he
though you believed                                                             would careflly weigh their words, cajole confidences out of them, and
every word he said.
gather informaton invauable to his work as France's foreign minister. At
This will give him
te Congress of Vienna ( 1814- 1815) he did his spying in oter ways: He
courage to go on; he
will hecome more                                                                would blurt out what seemed to be a secret (actualy something he had
vehement in his                                                                 made up), then watch his listeners' reactons. He might tell a gathering of
assertions, and in the
diplomats, for instace, tat a reliable source had revealed to him that the
end betray himself
czar of Russia was planning to arrest his top genera for teason. By wath­
Again, if you perceive
that a person is trying                                                         ing the diplomats' reactions to this made-up story, he would know whic
to conceal something
ones were most excited by the weaening of the Russian army-perhaps
from you, but with only
their goverments had designs on Russia? As Baron von Stetten said,
partial success, look as
"Monsieur Talleyrand fires a pistol into the air to see who will jump out the
though you did not
believe him. The oppo­                                                          window."
sition on your part will
During socia gatherings and innocuous encounters, pay attention.
provoke him into lead-
This is when people's guads are down. By suppressing your own personal­
ing out his reserve of
tYUth and bringing the                                                          ity, you can mae them reveal things. The brilliance of te maneuver is
whole force of it to                                                            that they will mistake your interest in tem for friendship, so that you not
hear upon your
only leam, you mae allies.
incredulity.
Neverteless, you should practice this tactc wit caution ad care. I
A RTHUR
SnlOPFNIIAUER,                                                                  people begin to suspect you are worming secrets out of them under the
1 718-1 860                                                                     cover of conversaton, tey will stricdy avoid you. Emphasize friendly
chatter, not vauable information. Your search for gems of information can­
not be too obvious, or your probing questons                                    w                                                                             revea more about your­
self and your intentions tan about the informaton you hope to find.
A trick to try in spying comes from La Rochefoucauld, who wrote,
"Sincerit is found in very few men, and is ofen te cleverest of ruses-­
one is sincere in order to draw out the confidence and secrets of te other."
By pretending to bare your heart to another person, in other words, you
mae them more likely to reveal their own secrets. Give tem a fals  con­
fession and tey will give you a rea one. Anoter tic was identfied by
the philosopher                                                                 Aur Schopenhauer, who suggested vehemendy conta­
dictng people you're in conversation wit as a way of irritating tem, str­
ring them up so tat tey lose some of te control over their words. In their
emotonal reacton they will reveal all kinds of truths about themselves,
truths you can later use against them.
Another metod of indirect spying is to test people, to lay litde taps
that make tem revea things about themselves. Chosroes 11, a notoriously
clever seventh-century king of the Persians, had may ways of seeing
trough his subjects without raising suspicion. If he notced, for instance,
that two of his courters had become partcularly fiendly, he would call
one of them aside and say he had informaton that the other was a traitor,
and would soon be killed. The king would tell the courtier he trusted him
more than anyone, and that he must keep tis informaton secret. Then he
104                                                                             LAW                                                                           14

would watch the two men caeflly. If he saw that the second courter had
not chaged in his behavior toward the king, he would conclude that te
first courtier had kept the secret, and he would quickly promote the ma,
later taking hir aside to confess, "I meant to kill your friend because of
certain information that had reached me, but, when 1 investgated the mat­
ter, 1 found it was untrue." If, on the other hand, the second courtier started
to avoid the king, acting aloof and tense, Chosroes would know that the se­
cret had been revealed. He would ban the second courtier fom his court,
lettng hir know that the whole business had only been a test, but tat
even though the man had done nothing wrong, he could no longer trust
hir. The first courtier, however, had revealed a secret, and hir Chosroes
would ban fom his entire kingdom.
It may seem an odd form of spying that reveals not empirica informa­
ton but a person's chaacter. Ofen, however, it is the best way of solving
problems before they arise.
By temptng people into certain acts, you leam about their loyalty,
teir honesty, ad so on. And this kind of knowledge is ofen the most
vauable of all: Armed with it, you can predict their actons in the ftre.
Image :
The  Third  Eye  of
the Spy. In the land of
the two-eyed, the third eye
gives you the omniscience
of a god. You see frther than
others, and you see deeper
into ther. Nobody is
safe from the eye
but you.
Authority: Now, the reason a brilliant sovereign and a wse general
conquer the enery whenever they move, and their achievements
surpass those of ordinary men, is their foreknowledge of the enemy
situation. This "foreknowledge" cannot be elicited from spirits, nor
from gods, nor by analogy with past events, nor by astrologie calcu­
lations. It must be obtained from men who know the enemy sit­
uation-from spies. (Sun-tzu,  Te Art 0/   War, fourth century B.C.)
LAW 14                                                                            105

REVERSAL
Information is critca to power, but just                                         a        you spy on oter people, you
must be prepaed for them to spy on you. One of the most potent weapons
in the battle for informaton, then, is giving out false informaton. As Win­
ston Churchill said, "Truth is so precious that she should always be at­
tended by a bodyguard of lies." You must surround YOUTself with such a
bodyguard, so that YOUT tuth canot be penetated. By platng the infor­
mation of YOUT choice, you control the gae.
In 1944 the Nazis' rocket-bomb attacks on London suddenly escalated.
Over two thousand V- I flying bombs fell on the city, killing more than five
thousad people and wounding many more. Somehow, however, te Ger­
mans consistently missed their tagets. Bombs that were intended for
Tower Bridge, or Piccadilly, would fall weIl short of the city, landing in the
less populated suburbs. This was because, in fing their targets, te Ger­
mans relied on secret agents they had planted i England. They did not
know that these agents had been discovered, and that in their place,
English-contolled agents were feeding them subtly deceptive information.
The bombs would hit farther ad farther from their targets every time
they fell. By the end of the campaig tey were landing on cows in the
country. By feeding people wrong informaton, then, you gain a potent ad­
vantage. While spying gives you a third eye, disinformaton puts out one of
your enemy's eyes. A cyclops, he always misses his target.
106                                                                              LAW 14

LAW
15
CRU S H  YOUR
ENEMY TOTALLY
JUDGMENT
All great leaders since Moses have known that a feared
enemy must be crushed compltely. (Sometimes the have
lared this the hard way. ) I one ember i lef alight, no
matter how dimly it smol                                   s, a fire will eventually break
out. More is lost through stoping halay than through
total annihilation: The enemy will recover and will seek
revenge. Crush him, not only in body but in spirit.
107

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
No rivalry between leaders is more celebrated in Chinese history than the
The remnants of an
struggle between Hsiang Yu and Liu Pag. These two generals began their
ene/ny con hecofne
acrive like those ofa                                                           careers as friends, fghting on the same side. Hsiang Yu came from the no­
diseuse or/re. Henee,
bility; lage and powerful, given to bouts of violence and temper, a bit dull­
these shollid be exter­
witted, he was yet a mighty warrior who always fought at the head of his
mi/wte" completely. .
One slwuld never                                                                troops. Liu Pang came fom peasant stock. He had never been much of a
ignore an enemy,                                                                soldier, and preferred women and wine to fighting; in fact, he was some­
knowing hir to be                                                               thing of a scoundrel. But he was wily, and he had the ability to recognize
weak. He becomes
                                                                                the best strategists, keep them as his advisers, and listen to their advice. H
dangemus in due
course, like the spark                                                          had risen in the army through these strengths.
offire in a haystack.                                                           In 208 B.C., the king of Ch'u sent two massive armies to conquer the
KAUIILYA,                                                                       powerfl kingdom of Ch'in. One amy went north, under the generalship
INDIAN PHILOSOPHER,
of Sung Yi, wit Hsiag Yu  second in command; the other, led by Liu
'1                                                                              IIIRn CENTlJRY B.C
Pang, headed straight toward Ch'in. The target was the kingdom's splendid
capital, Hsien-yang. And Hsiang Yu, ever violent and impatient, could not
stand the idea that Liu Pang would get to Hsien-yang first, and perhaps
would assure command of the entire army.
At one  point on the northem front, Hsiang's commander,  Sung Yi,
hesitated in sending his troops into battle.  Furious, Hsiang entered Sung
'1'1 1 1'.  T B  \ 1'  .\T
Yi's tent, proclaimed hir a traitor, cut off his head, and assumed sole com­
"                                                                               I\ICA< : I . I .\
mand of the army. Witout waitng for orders, he left te northem front
On the day Ramiro
and marched directly on Hsien-yang. He feit certain he was the better sol­
was executed, eeSafe
IBorgial quit Cesena,                                                           dier and general than Liu, but, to his utter astonishment, his riyal, leading a
leaving the mutilated                                                           smaller, swifter army, managed to reach Hsien-yang first. Hsiang had an
body on the town
adviser, Fan Tseng, who  wa                                                     ed him, "This village headman [Liu Pang]
square, and marched
used to be greedy only for riches and women, but since entering the capital
south. Three days later
he arrived at Fano,                                                             he has not been led astray by wealth, wine, or sex. That shows he is aiming
where he received (he                                                           high."
envoys of (he city of
Fan Tseng urged Hsiang to kill his riyal before it was too late. He told
Anuma, who assured
the general to invite the wily peasant to a banquet at their camp outside
hir of their loyalty.
A messenger from                                                                Hsien-yang, and, in the midst of a celebratory sword dance, to have his
Vitel/ozzo Vitelli                                                              head cut off. The invitation was sent; Liu fell for the trap, and came to the
anflounced that the
banquet. But Hsiang hesitated in ordering the  sword dance, and by the
little A driatic port of
time he gave the signal,  Liu had sensed a trap, and managed to escape.
Sinigaglia had surrefl­
dered to the condottieri                                                        "Bah!" cried Fan Tseng in disgust, seeing that Hsiang had botched the plot.
Imercenary soldiers}.                                                           "One cannot plan wit a simpleton. Liu Pang will steal your empire yet
()nly the citadel, in
and make us all his prisoners."
charge of the Cenoese
Realizing his mistake, Hsiang hurriedly marched on Hsien-yang, this
A l/drea Doria, still
held Ollt, and Doria                                                            tme determined to hack off his rival's head.  Liu was never one to fight
refused to hand it over                                                         when the odds were against hir, and he abandoned the city. Hsiang cap­
to anyofle except
tured Hsien-yang, murdered the young prince of Ch'in, and bumed the
Cesare hirself
city to the ground.  Liu was now Hsiang's bitter enemy,  and he pursued
IBorgiaj sent word
                                                                                that he would arrive                                                              hir for many months, finally comering hir in a walled city. Lacking food,
                                                                                the next day, which                                                               his army in disarray, Liu sued for peace.
                                                                                was just what (he
                                                                                                                                                                  Again Fan Tseng wamed Hsiang, "Crush hir now! If you let hir go
108                                                                             LAW  15

again, you will be sorry later." But Hsiag decided to  be mercifl.  He          condottieri wanted t
hear. Once he reached
wanted to bring Liu back to Ch'u alive, and to force his former fiend to ac­
Sinigaglia. Cesare
knowledge hir as master. But Fan proved right: Liu managed to use the
would he an easy prey,
negotations for his surrender as a distraction, ad he escaped with a smal       caught hetween the
amy. Hsiang, amazed that he had yet again let his riyal slip away, once         citadel and their force.\
ringing the town . . .
more set out after Liu, this time with such ferocity that he seemed to have
The condottieri were
lost his mind. At one point, having captured Liu's father in battle, Hsiag      sure they had military
stood the old man up during the fighting and yelled to Liu across the line of   superiority. helieving
troops, "Surrender now, or 1 shall boi! your father aive ! "  Liu calmly an­    that the departure of
                                                                                the French troops had
swered, "But we are swor brothers. S my father is your father also. If you
                                                                                left Cesare with only
insist on boiling your own father, send me a bowl of the soup! "  Hsiang        a small j(Jrce.
backed down, and the struggle continued.                                        In fact, according to
Machiavelli, [Borgiaj
A few weeks later, in the thick of the hunt, Hsiang scattered his forces
had left Cesena with
unwisely, and in a surprise attac Liu was able to surround his main gari­
ten thousand infantry­
son. For the first time the tables were tured. Now it was Hsiag who sued        nlen and three thou­
for peace. Liu's top adviser urged hir to destroy Hsiang, crush his army,       sand horse, taking
pains 10 split up his
show no mercy. "To let hir go would be like rearing a tger-it will devour
en so that they wOllld                                                          m
you later," the adviser said. Liu agreed.
march along parallel
Making a false teaty, he lured Hsiag into relaxing his defense, then            routes hefore converg­
slaughtered almost all of his army. Hsiag managed to escape. Alone ad           ing on Sinigaglia. The
reason for such a large
on foot, knowing that Liu had put a bounty on his head, he came upon a
force was that he knew,
smal group of his own retreatng soldiers, ad cried out, "I hear Liu Png
from a confession
has offered one thousand pieces of gold and a fief of ten thousand families     extracted jiom Ramiro
for   my head. Let me do you a favor. " Then he slit his own throat and died.   de Lorca, what the
condottieri had up
their sleeve. He there­
Interpretation
fore decided 10 turn
Hsiang Yu had proven his ruthlessness on many a occasion. He rarely             their own trap against
hesitated in doing away with a riyal if it served his purposes. But with Liu    them. This was the
masterpiece oftrickery
Pang he acted differently. He respected his rival, and did not want to defeat
that the historian Paolo
hir through deception; he wanted to prove his superiority on the battle­
Giovio later called "the
field, even to force the clever Liu to surrender and to serve hir. Every time                               magnijcent deceit. "
he had his riYal in his hands, something made hir hesitate-                     fatal sympa­                At dawn on Decemher
31 [1502j, Cesare
thy with or respect for the man who, after all, had once been a fiend and
reached the outskirts of
comrade in arms. But the moment Hsiang made it clear that he intended to
                                                                                Sinigaglia                  Led hy
do away with Liu, yet failed to accomplish it, he sealed his own doom. Liu      Michelatta Corella,
would not suffer the same hesitation on ce the tables were tured.                                           Cesare 's advance guard
                                                                                of two h undred lances
This is te fate that faces al of us when we sympathize with our ene­
                                                                                lOok up its position on
mies, when pity, or the hope of reconciliaton, makes us pull bac from           the canal bridge. . .
doing away with them. We only strengthen their fear and hated of uso We         This control of the
have beaten them, and they are humiliated; yet we nurture these resentfl        bridge effectiveiy
prevented the conspira­
vipers who will one day kill uso  Power cannot be dealt with this way. It
tors ' troops from with ­
must be exterminated, crushed, and denied te chance to retur to haunt
drawing. . .
uso This is all the truer with a former friend who has become an enemy.         Cesare greeted the
condottieri effusively
The  law govering fatal  antagonisms reads: Reconciliation is  out of the
and invited them 10
question. Only one side can win, and it must win totally.
                                                                                join him                    Michelotto
Liu Pang leared this lesson weIl. Afer defeating Hsiang Yu, this son
LAW 15                                                                          109

hat! prepared the                                                            of a farmer went on t become supreme commader ofthe amies ofCh'u.
Palazzo Bernardino
Crushing his next riva-the king of Ch'u, his own former leader-he
for Cesare 's use, and
crowned himself emperor, defeated everyone in his pat, and went down
Ihe duke inviled Ihe
condotticri inside, ,                                                        in history as one of the greatest rulers of China, te immortal Han Kao-tsu,
Onee int!oors Ihe men                                                        founder of the Han Dynasty.
were lJuietlv arrested
by guards Wfl crepl up
Those who seek to achieve things should show no mercy.
from Ihe rear, , , '
[Cesare[ gave orders                                                         Kautilya, Indian philosopher, third century B, C,
for an aflack on
Vitelli 's and Orsini :\'
soldiers in the oallying
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
areas, ' , , Thai night,
while Iheir Imops were                                                       Wu Chao, bor in A.D.  625, was te daughter of a duke, and as a beautifl
being crushed, Miche­                                                        young woma of many charms, she was accordingly attached to the harem
lotto throttled Olive-
of Emperor T'a Tsung.
retto and Vile/li in Ihe
The imperial harem was a dangerous place, fll of young concubines
Bernardino palace, , ,
AI one fell swoop,                                                           vying to become the emperor's favorite. Wu's beauty and forceful charac­
[ßorgiaJ had goi rid of
ter quickly won her this battle, but, knowing tat an emperor, like other
his former generals ami
powerfl men, is a creare of whim, and tat she could easily be replaced,
lvors! enemic.'
she kept her eye on te future.
TIE BORC1IAS,
IVAN CUHJLAS,                                                                Wu managed to seduce the emperor's dissolute son, Kao Tsung, on te
['89
only possible occasion when she could find him aone: while he was reliev­
ing himself at te roya urinal. Even so, when the emperor died and Kao
Tsung took over te trone, she still suffered the fate to whic al wives and
concubines of a deceased emperor were bound by tadition and law: Her
head shaven, she entered a convent, for what was supposed to be the rest
of her life. For seven years Wu schemed to escape. By communicating in
JiJ have ullimate                                                            secret wit te new emperor, and by befriending his wife, te empress, she
victory, YOll must be                                                        maaged to get a highly unusua roya edict allowing her to retur to the
ruthfess,
palace and to the royal harem. Once tere, she fawned on the empress,
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE,
while still sleeping with the emperor. The empress did not discourage
176'-lH21
this-she had yet to provide the emperor with an heir, her position was
vulnerable, and Wu  was a valuable ally.
In 654 Wu Chao gave birt to a cild. One day te empress came to
visit, and as soon as she had left, Wu smothered te newbor-her own
baby. When the murder was discovered, suspicion immediately fell on te
empress, who had been on te scene moments earlier, and whose jealous
nature was known by all. This was precisely Wu's plan. Shortly tereafter,
the  empress  was chaged wit murder and executed. Wu Chao was
crowned empress in her place. Her new husbad, addicted t his life of
pleasure, gladly gave up the reins of govemment to Wu Chao, who was
from then on known as Empress Wu.
Although now in a position of great power, Wu hardly feh secure.
There were enemies everywhere; she could not let down her guard for one
moment. Indeed, when she was forty-one, she began to fear tat her beau­
tfl young niece was becoming te emperor's favorite. She poisoned the
woman with a day mixed into her food. I 675 her own son, touted as the
110                                                                          LAW 15

heir apparent, was poisoned as weIl. The next-eldest son-illegitimate, but
now the crown prince-was exiled a little later on tmped-up charges.
And when the emperor died, in 683, Wu managed to have the son after
that declared unfit for the throne. All this meat that it was her youngest,
most ineffectual son who finally became emperor. In this way she contn­
ued to rule.
Over the next five years there were innumerable palace coups . A of
them failed, and all of the conspirators were executed. By 688 there was no
one lef to challenge Wu. She proclaimed herself a divine descendat of
Buddha, and in 690 her wishes were finally granted: She was named Holy
ad Divine "Emperor" of China.
Wu became emperor because there was literally nobody left from the
previous T'ang dynasty. And so she ruled unchallenged, for over a decade
of relative peace. In 705, at the age of eighty, she was forced to abdicate.
Interpretation
All who knew Empress Wu   remarked on her energy and intelligence. At
the time, there was no glory available for an ambitous woman beyond a
few years in the imperial harem, then a lifetme walled up in a convent. In
Wu's gradual but remarkable rise to the top, she was never naive. She
knew that any hesitaton, any momentay weaness, would speIl her end.
If, every time she got rid of a riyal a new one appeared, the soluton was
simple: She had to crush them all or be killed herself. Other emperors be­
fore her had followed the same path to the top, but Wu-who, as a woman,
had next to no chance to gain power-had to be more ruthless still.
Empress Wu's forty-year reign was one of the longest in Chinese his­
tory. Although the story of her bloody rise to power is weIl known, in
China she is considered one of the period's most able and effective rulers.
A prest asked the dying Spanish statesman and general Ram6n Mar Narvaez
(1800-1868), "Does your Exceltency forgive alt your enemies?" "[ do not
have to forgive my enemies, " answered Narvaez, "[  have had them alt shot. "
KEYS TO POWER
It is no accident that the two stories illustrating this law come from China:
Chinese history abounds with examples of enemies who were lef aive and
retmed to haunt the lenient. "Crush the enemy" is a key stategie tenet of
Sun-tzu, the fourth-century-B.c. author of Te Art ofWr. The idea is simple:
Your enemies wish you ill. There is nothing they want more than to elimi­
nate you. If, in your stuggles with them, you stop hafay or even three
quarters of the way, out of mercy or hope of reconciliation, you only make
them more determined, more embittered, and they will someday take re­
venge. They may act friendly for the tme being, but this is only because
you have defeated them. They have no choice but to bide their time.
The soluton: Have no mercy. Crush your enemies as totally as they
LAW  1 5                                                                        111

would crush you. Ultmately t e  only peace a d  security you can hope for
from your enemies is their disappearance.
Mao Tse-tung, a devoted reader of Sun-tzu and of Chinese history gen­
erally, knew the importance of this law. In 1934 the Communist leader and
some 75,000 poorly equipped soldiers fled into the desolate mountains of
wester China to escape Chiang Ka-shek's much lager amy, in what has
since been caled te Long March.
Chiang was determined to eliminate every last Communist, ad by a
few years later Mao had less than 10,000 soldiers left. By 1937, in fact,
when China was invaded by Japan, Chiag calculated that the Commu­
nists were no longer a treat. He chose to give up the ehase and concen­
trate on the Japaese. Ten years later the Communists had recovered
enough to rout Chiag's army. Chiang had forgotten te ancient wisdom of
erushing te enemy; Mao had not. Chiang was pursued until he and his en­
tire army fled to the island of Taiwan. Noting remains of his regime in
mainland China to this day.
The wisdom behind "crushing the enemy" is as ancient as the Bible:
Its first praettoner may have been Moses, who leared it fom God Him­
self, when He pated the Red Sea for the Jews, then let the water flow back
over the pursuing Egyptans so that "not so muc as one of them re­
maned." When Moses retured from Mount Sinai with the Ten Com­
mandments and found his people worshipping the Golden Calf, he had
every last offender slaughtered. And just before he died, he told his follow­
ers, finally about to enter the Pomised Land, that when they had defeated
the tribes of Canaa they should "utterly destroy tem . . . make no
eovenant with them, and show no merey to them."
The goal of total victory is an axiom of modem warfare, and was codi­
fied as such by Carl von Clausewitz, the premier philosopher of war. Ana­
lyzing the campagns of Napoleon, von Clausewitz wrote, "We do claim
that direct anihilation of the enemy's forees must always be the dominant
considertion                                                                    Onee a maor victory is achieved tere must be no talk of
rest, of breathing space . . . but only of the pursuit, going for the enemy
again, seizing his eapital, attacking his reserves and aything else that
might give his county ad and eomfort." The reason for this is that ater
war come negotiaton and the division of territory. If you have only won a
partial victory, you will inevitably lose in negotiation what you have
gained by war.
The solution is simple: Allow your enemies no options. Annihilate
them and their territory is yours to cave. The goal of power is to control
your enemies completely, to mae them obey your will. You cannot afford
to go halfay. If they have no options, they will be forced to do your bid­
ding. This law has applieatons far beyond the battefield. Negotaton is the
insidious viper that will eat away at your vietory, so give your enemies
nothing to negotiate, no hope, no room to maneuver. They are crushed
and tat is that.
Realize this: In your stuggle for power you will stir up rivalries and
112                                                                             LAW                                                       15

create enemies. There will be people you canot win over, who will re­
main your enemies no matter what. But whatever wound you inflicted on
them, deliberately or not, do not tae their hated personaly. Just recog­
nize that there is no possibility of peace between you, especially as long as
you stay in power. If you let them stck around, they will seek revenge, as
certanly as night follows day. To   wait for them to show their cards is just
silly; as Empress Wu understood, by then it will be too late.
Be realistic: With an enemy like this around, you will never be secure.
Remember the lessons of history, and the wisdom of Moses ad Mao:
Never go halfay.
It is not, of course, a queston of murder, it is a queston of banishment.
Sufficiently weakened and then exiled fom your court forever, your ene­
mies are rendered harmless. They have no hope of recovering, insinuating
themselves and hurtng you. And if they cannot be banished, at leat un­
derstand that they are plottng aganst you, ad pay no heed to whatever
fiendliness they feign. Your only weapon in such a situation is your own
wainess. If you cannot baish them immediately, then plot for the best
tme to act.
Image: A Viper crushed
beneath your foot but left
alive, will rear up and bite
you with a double dose of
venom. An enemy that is
left around is  like a half­
dead viper that you nurse
back to health. Time makes
the venom grow stronger.
Authority: For it must be
noted, that men must either be
caressed or else annihilated;
they will revenge themselves
for small injuries, but cannot
do so for great ones; the injury
therefore that we do to a man
must be such that we need not
fear his vengeance. (Niccolo
Machiavelli,                                                                    1469-1527)
LAW 15                                                                          113

REVERSAL
This law should very rarely be ignored, but it does sometmes happen that
it is bettr to let your enemies destroy temselves, if suc a thing is possi­
ble, tan to make tem suffer by YOUf hand. In warfare, for example, a
good general knows tat if he atacks an   amy when it is comered, its sol­
diers will fight much more fiercely. It is sometmes better, ten, to leave
them a escape route, a way out. A they retreat, they wear temselves out,
and ae ultinately more demoraized by the reteat tan by any defeat he
rght inflict  on the battefield.                                              Wen  you have  someone on te ropes,
ten-but only when you are SUfe tey have no chace of recovery-you
rght let tem hang themselves. Lt them be the agents of teir own de­
struction. The result will be te same, and you won't feel haf as bad.
Finally, sometmes by crushing an enemy, you embitter tem so muc
that tey spend years and years plotting revenge. The Treaty of Versalles
had such an effect on te Germans. Some would argue tat in the long            r
it would be better to show some leniency. The problem is, your leniency
involves another risk-it may embolden the enemy, whic still harbors a
grudge, but now has some room to operate. It is almost always wiser t
crush YOUf enemy. If tey plot revenge years later, do not let YOUf guard
down, but simply crush tem again.
114                                                                           LAW 15

LAW
16
U SE AB SENCE TO
INCREASE RESPECT
AND HONOR
JUDGMENT
Too much circulation makes the prce go down: The more
you are seen and heard jrom, the more common you ap­
pear Iyou are already established in a group, temporary
withdrawal jom it will make you more talked about,
even more admired. You must lear when to lave. Cre­
ate value through scarcity.
115

TRANSGRESSION AND OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Sir Guillaume de  Balaun  was  a troubadour who  roamed  the  South  of
1'111'. C                                                                       \ \I I': 1 .                                                                    \'1) 1'111:
France in the Middle Ages, going from castle to castle, recitng poety, and
H ,( ) \T I \C   TII:K:i
playing the perfect knight. At the castle of Javiac he met and fell in love
rhe first man whu saw
with te beautfl lady of te house, Madame Guillelma de Javiac, He sang
a wmelfled;
The second ventured                                                             her his songs, recited his poetry, played chess wit her, and little by little
within distance;                                                                she in tur fell in love wit him. Guillaume had a friend, Sir Pierre de Ba­
The thir< dared slip a
jac, who taveled with him and who was also received at the castle, And
halter round its head,
Pierre too fell in love with a lady in Javiac, the gracious but temperamental
Fam iliarity in this
existence                                                                       Vieretta.
Makes all things tame,                                                          Then one day Pierre and Vieretta had a violent quarrel.  The lady
f(" what may seem
dismissed him,  and he sought out his friend Guillaume to help heal the
Tcrri/JIe or bizarre,
breach and get him back i her good graces. Guillaume was about t leave
wll'n Oflce our eyes
lIave hall time to                                                              the castle for a while, but on his retur, several weeks later, he worked his
acclimatize,                                                                    magie, and Pierre and the lady were reconciled.  Pierre feit that his love
Becomes quite
                                                                                had increased tenfold-that there was no stronger love, in fact, than the
comnwnpillce, Since
f 'm Oll this theme,                                                            love that follows reconciliation. The stonger and longer the disagreement,
f've heard uJsentinels                                                          he  told  Guillaume,  the  sweeter  the  feeling that comes  with  peace  and
posted by the shore
rapprochement.
WllO, spouing some­
A a troubadour, Sir Guillaume prided himself on experiencing all the
thing Jar-away ajoat,
COllldn 't resist                                                               joys and sorrows of love. On hearing his friend's talk, he too wanted know
Ihe shoul:                                                                      the bliss of reconciliation afer a quarrel. He terefore feigned great anger
"A sail! A sail!
with Lady Guillelma, stopped sending her love letters, and abrupty left the
A mighty man-of-war! "
castle ad stayed away, even during te festvals and hunts. This drove the
Five mimIfes laler it's
a packel boat,                                                                  young lady wild.
Ami then a skiff; and                                                           Guillelma sent messengers to  Guillaume  to find out what had hap­
Ihe" a bale,
pened, but he                                                                   ted the messengers away. He thought a this would make
Ami jnal/y some slicks
her angry, forcing him to plead for reconciliaton as Pierre had. Instead,
bobbing aboU/,
I know of plenty sllch                                                          however, his absence had te opposite effect: It made Guillelma love him
7(, whom Ihis Slor}                                                             all the more. Now te lady pursued her knight, sending messengers and
applies­
love notes of her own. This was almost unheard of-a lady never pursued
People whom distance
her toubadour.  And Guillaume did not like it.  Guillelma's forwardness
magIlIfies,
Who, close 10, don 'I                                                           made him feel she had lost some of her dignity. Not only was he no longer
amount co mIlch,                                                                sure of his plan, he was no longer sure of his lady.
SELECTED l'ABLFS,                                                               Finally, afer several months of not hearing from Guillaume, Guillelma
J r AN  Ile LA  FONTAINE,
1 62 1- 1 695                                                                   gave up. She sent him no more messengers, and he began to wonder-per­
haps she was angry? Perhaps te plan had worked afer all? So much the
better if she was. He would wait no more-it was time to reconcile. S he
put on his best robe, decked the horse in its fanciest caparison, chose a
magnificent heImet, and rode off to Javiac.
On hearing tat her beloved had ret                                              ed,  Guillelma rushed to see
him, knelt before him, dropped her veil to kiss him, and begged forgive­
ness for whatever slight had caused his anger. Imagine his confsion and
despair-his plan had failed abysmally. She was not angry, she had never
been angry, she wa only deeper i love, and he would never experience
the joy of reconciliaton afer a quarel. Seeing her now, and still desperate
116                                                                             LAW 16

to taste that jOY, he decided to ty one more tme: He drove her away with
harsh words and threatening gestures. She left, this time vowing never to
1'                                                                               1 \'1'                         1 1 11'1'1  I',';   m
see hir again.
1'111: U)C
The next moring the toubadour regretted what he had done. He
While serving llnder
rode back to Javiac, but the lady would not receive hir, and ordered her
the Duke Ai o[ Lu,
servants to chase hir away, across the drawbridge ad over the hill. Guil­        T'ien Jao, rescnting hi .. '
laume fled. Back in his chamber he collapsed ad stated to cry: He had            ohscure position, said
to his master, "I am
made a terrible mistake. Over the next year, unable to see his lady, he ex­
going to wander [ar
perienced the absence, the terrible absence, that ca only inflame love. He
away Iike a snow
wrote one of his most beautifl poems, "My song ascends for mercy pray­           goo.se.
ing." And he sent many letters to Guillelma, explaining what he had done,        " What do YOll mean h)'
that? " inquired the
and begging forgiveness.
Duke,
After a great deal of this, Lady Guillelma, remembering his beautifl
"Do you see the cock? "
songs, his handsome figure, and his skills in dancing and falconry, found        sait T'ien Jao in reply.
herselfyearing to have hir bac. As penance for his cruelty, she ordered          " Its cresl is a symhol of
civi/ir); its power/i;!
hir to remove the nail fom the little finger of his right hand, and to send it
talons suggest slrenglh;
to her along with a poem describing his miseries.
irs daring to fixht any
He did as she asked. Finaly Guillaume de Balaun was able to taste the            enemy denotes
cuuraxe; its instinc! to
ultimate  sensation-a reconciliation even surpassing that of his friend
in vite others whcnever
Pierre.
[ood is ohlaincd shows
henevolence; {mi, lasl
Interpretation                                                                   hut nOl leasl, its pune­
lua!ity in keepi"g the
Trying to discover the joys of reconciliation, Guillaume de Balaun inadver­
time through Ihe niXfzl
tently experienced the tuth of the law of absence and presence. At the
gives us an example of
stat of a affair, you need to heighten your presence in the eyes of the          veracity In spile.
other. If you absent yourself too early, you may be forgotten. But once          however, of Ihese live
virtues, the cock i,' daily
your lover's emotions are engaged, and the feeling of love has crystallized,
killed to lill a dish on
absence inflames and excites. Giving no reason for your absence excites
your tahle. Why? The
even more: The other person assures he or she is at fault. While you are         reason is Ihat it is
away, the lover's imagination taes flight, and a stimulated imagination          [ound wirhin our reach,
On the other hand, the
canot help but make love grow stonger. Conversely, the more Guillelma
snow go(}se traverses in
pursued Guillaume, the less he loved her-she had become too present,
one jlixht a Ihousand li.
too accessible, leaving no room for hi imagination and fancy, so that his        Restinx in VOllr garden,
feelings were suffocatng. When she finally stopped sending messengers,           il prey,; on YOllr fishcs
ami tllrlle," and pecks
he was able to breathe again, and to retur to his pla.
.volIr m illel, Though
What withdraws, what becomes scarce, suddenly seems to deserve our
devoid u[ any of Ihe
respect and honor. What stays too long, inundating us with its presence,         cock's five virtues, yel
makes us disdain it. In the Middle Ages, ladies were constantly puttng           YOll prize (his hird f(Jr
Ihe sake of ils scarcil)'
their knights through tials of love, sending them on some long ad ardu­
This heing so. r shall jly
ous quest-all to create a patter of absence and presence. Indeed, had
far Iike a snow goose, "
Guillaume not left his lady in the first place, she might have been forced to
ANCIENT (HINES '
send hir away, creating an absence of her own.                                   PARABLES,
Yli HSIl! SEN, Hl.,
1 974
Absence diminishes minor passions and inflames geat ones,
as the wind douses a candle and fans afire.
La Rochefoucauld, 1 613-1680
LAW 16                                                                           117

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
For many centuries te Assyrias ruled upper Asia wit a iron fist. In te
eight century  B.C.,  however,  the  people  of Medea (now nortwestem
Iran) revolted against them, and finally broke free. Now te Medes had to
establish a new govemment. Determined to avoid any form of despotsm,
tey refsed to give  ultimate  power to any one man, or to  establish a
monarchy. Without a leader, however, te county soon fell into chaos,
and fractured into small kingdoms, with village fightng against village.
In one such village lived a man named Deioces, who bega to mae a
name for hirself for far deaing and te ability to settle disputes.
He did tis so successflly, in fact, that soon ay lega conflict in the
area was brought to hir, and his power increased. Throughout te lad,
the law had fallen into disrepute-te judges were corrupt, and no one en­
tusted their cases to te courts any more, resorting to violence instead.
When news spread of Deioces' wisdom, incorruptbilit, and unshakable
impatiaity, Medean villages far and wide tu                                   ed to hir to settle al man­
ner of cases. Soon he became te sole arbiter of justce in the lad.
At the height of his power, Deioces suddenly decided he had had
enough. He would no longer sit in te char of judgment, would hea no
more suits, sette no more disputes between brother and brother, village
and village. Complaning tat he was spending so muc time dealing with
other people's problems tat he had neglected his own                          a                                                 ars, he retired.
The  county  once agan descended into  chaos.  Wit the  sudden with­
drawa of a powerfl arbiter like Deioces, crime increased, and contempt
for the law was never greater. The Medes held a meetng of al the villages
to decide how to get out of teir predicament. "We cannot continue to live
in this country under these conditons," said one tiba leader. "Let us ap­
point one of our number to rule so that we can live under orderly govem­
ment, rather tan losing our hores atogeter in the present caos."
And so, despite all that the Medes had suffered under the Assyria des­
potsm, they decided to set up a monarchy and na                               e a king. And the ma
tey most wanted to rule, of course, was te fair-minded Deioces. He was
had to convince, for he wanted nothing more to do wit the villages' in­
fightng and bicering, but te Medes begged and pleaded-witout him te
county had descended into a state of lawlessness. Deioces finaly              aeed.
Yet he aso imposed conditons. An enormous paace was to be con­
structed for him, he was to be provided with bodyguards, and a capital city
was to be built from which he could rule. All of this wa done, and Deioces
settled into his paace.  In te center of te  capital,  the palace was sur­
rounded by wals, ad completely inaccessible to ordinary people. Deioces
ten established te terms of h rule: Admission to his presence was for­
bidden. Communication with te king was only possible through messen­
gers. No one in the royal court could see him more ta once a week, and
then only by permission.
Deioces ruled for                                                             fy-three years, extended the Medean empire, and
established the foundation for what would later be te  Persian empire,
under his great-great-grandson Cyrus. During Deioces' reign, the people's
118                                                                           LAW 16

respect for hir gradually tumed into a form of worship : He wa not a mere
mortal, they believed, but the son of a god.
Interpretation
Deioces was a man of great ambition. He determined early on that the
county needed a strong ruler, and that he was the man for the job.
In a land plagued with anarcy, the most powerfl man is the judge
and arbiter. So Deioces began his career by making his reputaton as a man
of impeccable fa                                                                ess.
At the height of his power as a judge, however, Deioces realized the
tth of the law of absence and presence: By serving so many clients, he
had become too notceable, too available, and had lost the respect he had
earlier enjoyed. People were taing his services for granted. The only way
to regain  the  veneration  and power he  wanted was  to  withdraw  com­
pletely, and let the Medes taste what life was like without hir. As he ex­
pected, they came begging for hir to rule.
Once Deioces had discovered the tut of this law, he carried it to its
ultmate realizaton. In the palace his people had built for hir, none could
see hir except a few courters, and those only rarely. As Herodotus wrote,
"There was a risk that if they saw him habitually, it might lead to jealousy
ad resentment, and plots would follow; but if nobody saw hir, the legend
would grow that he was a being of a different order from mere men."
A man said to a Devish: ""y d I not see you more ofen ?" The Dervih
relied, "Because the words '"Wy have you not been to see me ? ' are
sweeter to my ear than the words '"Wy have you come again ? ' "
Mulla Jami, quoted in ldries Shah 's  Caravan 0 1 Dreams, 1 968
KEYS TO POWER
Eve                                                                             r                     ing in te world depends on absence and presence. A strong pres­
ence will draw power and attenton to you-you shine more brightly than
those around you. But a point is inevitably reached where too much pres­
ence creates the opposite effect: The more you are seen ad heard from,
the more your value degrades. You become a habit. No matter how hard
you try to be different, subty, without your knowing why, people respect
you less and less. At the right moment you must leam to withdraw yourself
before they unconsciously push you away. It is a ga                             e of hide-and-seek.
The truth of this law can most easily be appreciated in matters of love
and seducton. In the beginning stages of an affair, the lover's absence stim­
ulates your imagination, forming a sort of aura aound hir or her. But this
aura fades when you know too much-when your imagination no longer
has room to roam. The loved one becomes a person like anyone else,  a
person whose presence is taken for granted. This is why the seventeenth­
century French courtesan Ninon de Lenclos advised constant feints at with­
drawal fom one's lover. "Love never dies of starvaton," she wrote,  "but
ofen of indigestion. "
LAW 16                                                                          119

The moment you allow yourself to b e  treated like anyone else, it i s  too
late-you ae swalowed ad digested. To   prevent tis you need t stve
te oter person of your presence. Force their respect by threatenirg tem
wit the possibility tat they will lose you far good; create a pater of pres­
ence ad absence.
Once you die, everytig about you                                                w                                                        seem different You                                         w   be
surrounded by a instant aura of respect. People will remember their crit­
cisms of you, teir aguments with you, and                                       w                                                        be filled with regret ad
guilt. They ae                                                                  rssing a presence tat will never retur. But you do not
have to wait untl you die : By completely withdrawing for a while, you cre­
ate a kind of death before death. And when you come back, it will be as if
you had come back from te dead-a a of resurrecton will                          dg to you,
and people                                                                      w                                                        be relieved at your retur. This is how Deioces made him­
self king.
Napoleon was recognizing the law of absence and presence when he
said, "I I am ofen seen at te theater, people                                   w                                                        cease to notice me."
Today, in a world inundated with presence                                       tough the flood of images, te
game  of withdrawa i al the more powerfl. We    raely know  when  to
witdraw anymore, ad noting seems private, so we ae awed by ayone
who is able t disappea by coice. Novelists J. D. Salinger and Thomas
Pynchon have created cultike followings by knowing when to disappear.
Aoter, more everyday side of tis law, but one that demonstates
its tuth even frther, is the law of scarcity in te  science of economics.
By witdrawing something fom te market, you create instant value. In
seventeenth-century Holland, the upper classes wanted to make te tulip
more ta just a beautfl flower-tey wanted it to be a kind of status sym­
bol. Making te flower  scace, indeed amost impossible to obtain,  they
sparked what was later caled tulipomaia. A single flower was now wort
more tha its weight in gold. In our own century, similaly, te art dealer
Joseph Duveen insisted on making the pantngs he sold as scace ad rare
as possible. To  keep teir prices elevated and their stats high, he bought up
whole collections ad stored tem in his basement. The pantngs that he
sold became more tha just pantng                                                they were felsh objects, their vaue
increased by their rarity. "You can get all the pict                            es you want a                                            fy tou­
sad dollas apiece-tat's easy," he  once  said.  "But to get pictures  at a
quarter of a million apiece-that wants doing!"
I  m  a  g  e :
The Sun. lt ca only be
appreciated by  its  absence.
The longer the  days of rain, the
more the sun is craved. But too many
hot days  and  the  sun  overwhelms.
Learn to keep yourself obscure and
make people demand your return.
120                                                                             LAW 16

Extend the law of scacity to your own skills. Make what you are offer­
ing the world rare and hard to find, and you instantly increase its value.
There always comes a moment when those in power overstay their
welcome. We   have grown tred of them, lost respect for them; we see them
a                                                                              no different fom the rest of ma   ind, which is to say that we see them as
rather worse, since we inevitably compare their current status in our eyes
to their former one. There is an art to knowing when to retre. If it is done
right, you regain the respect you had lost, and retain a part of your power.
The greatest mler of the  sixteenth century was Charles V King of
Spain, Hapsburg emperor, he govered an empire that at one point in­
cluded much of Europe and the New World. Yet at the height of his power,
in 1557, he retred to the monastery of Yuste. All of Europe was captivated
by his sudden withdrawal; people who had hated and feaed hir suddenly
called hir great, ad he came to be seen as a saint. In more recent times,
the film actess Greta Garbo wa never more admired than when she re­
tired, in 1941. For some her absence came too soon-she was in her mid­
thirtes-but she wisely preferred to leave on her own terms, rather than
waiting for her audience to grow tred of her.
Make yourself too available and the aura of power you have created
aound yourself will wear away. Tur the game around: Make yourself less
accessible and you increase the value of your presence.
Authority:
Use absence to create
respect  and  esteer.  If presence
diminishes fare, absence augments it.
A man who when absent is regarded as a
lion becomes when present something com­
mon  and  ridiculous.  Talents  lose  their luster
if we  become  too  familiar with  them,  for the
outer  shell  of the  mind  is  more  readily  seen
than its rich inner kernel. Even the  outstand-
ing genius makes use of retirement so that
men  ray  honor  hir  and  so  that  the
yearning  aroused  by  his   absence
ray cause hir to be esteered.
(Baltasar  Graciän,
1601-1658)
LAW 16                                                                         121

REVERSAL
This law only applies once a certan level of power has been attained. The
need to withdraw only comes ater you have established your presence;
leave too early and you do not increase YOUf respect, you are simply for­
gotten. When you are first entering onto the world's stage, create an image
that is recognizable, reproducible, and is seen everywhere. Untl that status
is attained, absence is dangerous-instead of fanning the fla                   es, it will ex­
tnguish them.
In love  and seduction, similarly,  absence is only effectve once you
have  sUfrounded  the  oter  wit YOUf image,  been  seen  by hir or  her
everywhere. Everything must remind YOUf lover of your presence, so that
when you do choose to be away, the lover will always be thinking of you,
will always be seeing you in his or her mind's eye.
Remember:  In  the  beginning,  mae  yourself not  scarce  but  om­
nipresent. Only what is seen, appreciated, and loved will be missed in its
absence.
122                                                                            LAW  1 6

LAW
17
KEEP OTHERS IN
SUSPENDED TERROR:
CULTIVATE AN AIR OF
UNPREDICTABILITY
JUDGMENT
Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiabl need to
seefamiliarity in other peol s actions. Your predictabil­
ity gives them a sense o contrl. Tur the tables: Be de­
liberately unpredictabl. Behavior that seems to have no
consistenc o purpose will keep them o.balance, and
the will wear themselves out trying to explain your
moves. Taken to an extreme, this strteg can intimidate
and terrorize.
123

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In May of 1972, chess champion Boris Spassky anxiously awaited his riyal
Bobby Fischer in Reykjavik, Iceland. The two men had been scheduled to
meet for the World Championship of Chess, but Fiscer had not arrived on
tme and the match was on hold. Fischer had problems with the size of the
prize money, problems with te way te money was to be distributed,
problems with the logistics of holding te match in Iceland. He might back
out at any moment.
Spassky tried to be patent. His Russian bosses feit tat Fischer wa hu­
miliating him and told him to wak away, but Spassky wanted this matc.
He knew he could destroy Fischer, and nothing was going to spoil the
greatest victory of his career. "So it seems that all O                       U     work may come to
nothing," Spassky told a comrade. "But what can we do? It is Bobby's
move. I he comes, we play. If he does not come; we do not play. A man
who is willing to commit suicide has the initiatve."
Fischer finaly arived in Reykjavi, but the problems, and the threat
of cancellation, continued. He disliked the hall where the match was to be
fought, he criticized the lightng, he complained about the noise of the
cameras, he even hated the chairs in which he and Spassky were to sit.
Now te Soviet Union took the initiative and threatened to withdraw their
man.
The bluff apparenty worked: Afer all the weeks of waiting, the end­
less and infriating negotiations, Fischer agreed to play. Everyone was re­
lieved,  no  one  more  than  Spassky.  But  on  te  day of the  official
introductons, Fischer arrived very late, and on the day when the "Match
of te Century" was to begin, he was late again. This tme, however, the
consequences would be dire: If he showed up too late he would forfeit the
first game. What was going on? Was he playing some sort of mind game?
Or was Bobby Fischer perhaps afraid ofBoris Spassky? I seemed to te as­
sembled grand masters, and to Spassky, that this young kid from Brooklyn
had a terrible case of the jitters. At 5:09 Fischer showed up, exactly one
minute before the match was to be canceled.
The first game of a chess toumament is critica, since it sets the tone for
the months to come. It is often a slow and quiet stuggle, wit the two play­
ers preparing themselves for the war and tying t read each oter's strate­
gies. This game wa different. Fischer made a terrible move early on,
perhaps te worst of his career, and when Spassky had hir on the ropes,
he seemed to give up. Yet Spassky knew that Fischer never gave up. Even
when facing checkmate, he fought to the bitter end, wearing te opponent
down. This time, tough, he seemed resigned. Then suddenly he broke out
a bold move tat put the room in a buzz. The move shocked Spassky, but
he recovered ad managed to                                                    w     te game. But no one could figure out
what Fischer was up to. Had he lost deliberately? Or was he rattled? Unset­
tled? Even, as some tought, insane?
Afer his defeat in te first game, Fischer complained al te more
loudly about te room, te cameras, and everything else. He also failed to
124                                                                           LAW   17

show up on time for the second game. This time the organizers had had
enough: He was given a forfeit. Now he was down two games to none, a
position fom which no one had ever come back to win a chess champi­
onship. Fischer was clearly unhinged. Yet in the third game, as all those
who  witnessed it remember, he had a ferocious look in his eye, a look that
clearly bothered Spassky. And despite the hole he had dug for hirself, he
seemed supremely confident. He did make what appeared to be another
blunder, as he had in the first game-but his cocky air made Spassky smell
a trap. Yet despite the Russian's suspicions, he could not figure out the trap,
ad before he knew it Fischer had checkmated hir. In fact Fischer's un­
orthodox tactics had completely unnerved his opponent. At the end of the
game, Fischer leaped up and rushed out, yelling to his confederates as he
smashed a fist into his palm, "I'm crushing him with brute force!"
In the next games Fischer pulled moves that no one had seen from
hir before, moves that were not his style. Now Spassky started to make
blunders. Afer losing the sixth game, he started to cry. One grand master
said, "                                                                           M                                ter this, Spassky's got to ask hirself if it's safe    to go bac to Rus­
sia." After the eighth game Spassky decided he knew what was happening:
Bobby Fischer was hypnotizing hir. He decided not to look Fischer in the
eye; he lost anyway.
After the fourteenth game he called a staf conference and announced,
"A attempt is being made to contol my mind." He wondered whether the
orange  juice  they  drank  at  the  chess  table  could  have  been  drugged.
Maybe chemicals were being blown into the air. Finally Spassky went pub­
Hc, accusing the Fischer team of putting something in the chairs that was al­
tering   Spassky's   mind.   The  KGB  went  on   aert:   Boris   Spassky  was
embarrassing the Soviet Union!
The chairs were taen apart and X-rayed. A chemist found nothing
unusual in tem. The only things anyone found anywhere, in fact, were
two dead flies in a Hghtng fixture. Spassky bega to complan of hallucina­
tions. He tried to keep playing, but his mind was unraveling. He could not
go on. On September 2, he resigned. Although stll relatively young, he
never recovered from this defeat.
Interpretation
In previous games between Fischer ad Spassky, Fischer had not fared
weIl. Spassky had an uncanny ability to read his opponent's strategy and
use it aganst hir. Adaptable ad patient, he would build attacs that would
defeat not in seven moves but in seventy. He defeated Fischer every tme
they played because he saw much further ahead, and because he was a bril­
Hant psychologist who never lost contol. One master said, "He doesn't just
look for the best move. He looks for the move that will disturb the man he
is playing."
Fischer, however, finay understood th                                             lt this was one of the keys to
Spassky's success: He played on your predictability, defeated you at your
own game. Everything Fischer did for the championship match was an at-
LAW                                                                               17                               125

tempt to put the initatve on his side and to keep Spassky off-balance.
Clearly the endless waitng had an effect on Spassky's psyche. Most power­
fl of all, tough, were Fischer's deliberate blunders and his appearance of
having no  clear  strategy.  I fact,  he was  doing everything he  could  to
scramble his old patters, even if it meant losing the first match and forfeit­
ing the second.
Spassky was known for his sangfroid and levelheadedness, but for the
first tme in his life he could not figure out his opponent. He slowly melted
down, untl at te end he was the one who seemed insane.
Chess contains te concentrated essence of life: First, because to win
you have to be supremely patient and faseeing; and second, because the
ga                                                                                e is built on patters, whole sequences of moves that have been played
before and                                                                        w                                                                       be played agan, wit slight ateratons, in any one match.
Your opponent anayzes the patters you are playing and uses tem to ty
to fore see your moves. Alowing hir nothing predictable to base his strat­
egy on gives you a big advantage. In cess as in life, when people canot
figure out what you are doing, tey are kept in a state of terror-waiting,
uncertain, confsed.
Life at court is a serious, melancholy game of chess, which requires us to draw
up our pieces and batteries, form a plan, pursue it, parry that of our
adversar. Sometims, however it is better to take rsks
and play the most capricious, unpredictable move.
leal de La Bmyere,  1 645-1 6 96
KEYS TO POWER
Nothing is more ter                                                               ng tha the sudden ad unpredictable. That is why
we are so frightened by earthquakes and toradoes: We   do not know when
they will stike.                                                                  M                                                                       ter one has occurred, we wait in terror for te next one.
To   a lesser degree, this is te effect that unpredictable human behavior has
on uso
Animals behave in set patters, which is why we are able to hunt and
kill tem. Only man has the capacity to consciously ater his behavior, to
improvise and overcome te weight of routine and habit. Yet most men do
not reaize this power. They prefer the comforts of routne, of giving in to
the aima natre that has tem repeatng the same  compulsive actons
time ad time again. They do tis because it requires no effort, and be­
cause they mistaenly believe tat if tey do not unsette others, tey will
be lef aone. Understand: A person of power instills a kind of fear by deli­
ertely unsettling tose around hir to keep te initiatve on his side. You
sometmes need to stike witout wa                                                  ing, t mae others tremble when
they least expect it. It is a device tat te powerfl have used for centuries.
Filippo Maia,  the  last of te Visconti dukes  of Mila in fifeenth­
century Italy, consciously did te opposite of what everyone expected of
hir. For instance, he might suddenly shower a courter with attenton, and
ten,  once  te ma had come to  expect a promoton to higher office,
126                                                                               LAW 17

would suddenly start treating hir with the utmost disdain. Confsed, the
man might leave the court, when the duke would suddenly recall hir ad
start teating hir weIl again. Doubly confsed, the courter would wonder
whether his assumption that he would be promoted had become obvious,
and offensive, to the duke, and would start to behave as if he no longer ex­
pected such honor. The duke would rebuke hir for his lac of ambiton
and would send hir away.
The secret of dealing with Filippo was simple: Do not presume to
know what he wants. Do not ty to guess what                                    w     please hir. Never inject
your wll; just surrender to hi will. Then wait to see what happens. Amidst
te confsion and uncertainty he created, the duke ruled supreme, unchal­
lenged ad at peace.
Unpredictability is most ofen the tactc of the master, but the under­
dog too can use it to great effect. If you find yourself outnumbered or cor­
nered, throw in a series of unpredictable moves. Your enemies will be so
confsed that they will pull back or make a tactcal blunder.
In the spring of 1862, during the American Civil War,  General
Stonewall Jackson and a force of 4,600 Confederate soldiers were torment­
ing the larger Union forces in the Shenadoah Valley. Meawhile, not far
away,  General George Brinton McClellan, heading a force of 90,000
Union soldiers, was marching south fom Washington, D.C., to lay siege to
Richmond, Virginia, the Confederate capita. As the weeks of the ca­
paign went by, Jackson repeatedly led his soldiers out of the Shenandoah
Valley, then back to it.
His movements made no sense. Was he preparing to help defend
Rchmond? Was he marching on Washington, now that McClellan's ab­
sence had lef it unprotected? Was he heading north to wreak havoc up
there? Why was his small force moving in circles?
Jackson's inexplicable moves made the Union generals delay the
march on Richmond as they waited to figure out what he was up to. Mean­
while, the South was able to pour reinforcements into the town. A battle
that could have crushed the Confederacy tumed into a stalemate. Jackson
used this tactic time and agan when facing numerically superior forces.
"Always mystif, mislead, and surprise the enemy, if possible," he said,
". . . such tactcs will win every tme and a smal army may thus destroy a
large one."
This law applies not only to war but to everyday situations. People are
always trying to read the motives behind your actions and to use your pre­
dictability against you. Throw in a completely inexplicable move and you
put them on the defensive. Because they do not und erstad you, they are
unnerved, and in suc a state you can easily intmidate them.
Pablo Picasso once remarked, "The best calculaton is the absence of
calculation. Once you have attained a certain level of recogniton, others
generally figure that when you do something, it's for an intelligent reason.
So it's really foolish to plot out your movements too careflly in advance.
You're better off actng capriciously."
For a while, Picasso worked with the                                           a     dealer Paul Rosenberg. At first
LAW 17                                                                         127

he alowed hir a fair amount of latitude in handling his paintngs, then one
day, for no appaent reason, he told te man he would no longer give hir
ay work t seIl. A Picaso explained, "Rosenberg would spend the next
forty-eight hours tying to figure out why. Was I reserving things for some
other deaer? I'd go on working and sleeping ad Rosenberg would spend
his time figuring. I two days he'd come back, nerves jangled, anxious, say­
ing, 'After all, dear friend, you wouldn't tur me down if I offered you this
much [naming a substatialy higher figure] for those paintngs rater than
the price I've been accustomed to paying you, would you?' "
Unpredictabilit is not only a weapon of terror: Scrambling YOUf pat­
ters on a day-to-day basis will cause a str around you and stimulate inter­
est. People will talk about you, acribe motves and explaatons that have
nothing to do wit the tut, but tat keep you constantly in their minds. In
the end, te more capricious you appea, te more respect you will ga             er.
Only te terminally subordinate act in a predictable manner.
Image:  The  Cyclone. A
wind that canot be fore­
seen. Sudden shifts  in
the barometer, in­
explicable  changes
in  direction  and
velocity. There is
no defense: A
cyclone  sows
terror and
confusion.
Authority: The enlightened ruler is so mysterious that he seems
to  dweIl nowhere, so inexplicable that no one can seek hir.
He  reposes  i nonaction  above,  and  his  ministers  tremble
below.  (Han-fei-tzu,  Chinese  philosoph er,  third century B.C.)
128                                                                            LAW 17

REVERSAL
Sometimes predictabilit can work in your favor: By creating a patter for
people to be  familiar and  comfortable with,  you  ca lull them  to  sleep.
They have prepared everything according to their preconceived notons
about you. You can use this in several ways: First, it sets up a smoke screen,
a comfortable front behind which you can carry on deceptve actons. Sec­
ond, it allows you on rare occasions to do something completely against
te patter, unsettling YOUf opponent so deeply he will fall to the ground
wthout being pushed.
In 1974 Muhammad Ali and George Foreman were scheduled to fight
for  the  world  heavyweight boxing championship.  Everyone knew what
would happen: Big George Foreman would try to land a knockout punch
while Ali would dance aound hir, wearing hir out. That was Ali's way of
fghting, his patter, and he had not changed it in more tha ten years. But
in this case it seemed to give Foreman the advantage : He had a devastating
punch, and if he waited, sooner or later Ali would have to come to hir.
Ali, the master strategist, had other plans: In press conferences before the
big fight, he said he was going to change his style and punch it out with
Foreman. No one, least of all Foreman, believed this for a second. That
plan would be suicide on Ali's part; he was playing the comedia, as usual.
Then, before the fight, Ali's traner loosened the ropes around the ring,
something a trainer would do if his boxer were intending to slug it out. But
no one believed this ploy; it had to be a setup.
To   everyone's amazement, Ali did exactly what he had said he would
do. As Foreman waited for hir to dance around, Ali went right up to hir
and slugged it out. He completely upset his opponent's stategy. At a loss,
Foreman ended up wearing hirself out, not by chasing Ali but by throw­
ing punches wildly, and taking more and more counterpunches. Finaly,
Ali landed a dramatic right cross that knoced out Forema. The habit of
assuming that a person's behavior will fit its previous patters is so stong
tat not even Ali's announcement of a strategy change was enough to upset
it. Foreman walked into a tap-the tap he had been told to expect.
A  warning:  Unpredictability  can  work against  you  sometimes,  es­
pecially if you are in a subordinate position. There are times when it is bet­
ter to let people feel comfortable and settled around you than to disturb
tem. Too much unpredictability will be seen as a sign of indecisiveness, or
even of some more  serious  psychic problem. Patters are powerful, and
you can terrify people by disrupting them.  Such  power  should  only be
used judiciously.
LAW  17                                                                          129

LAW
18
DO NOT BUILD FORTRESSES
TO PROTECT YOURSELF-
ISOLATION IS DANGEROUS
JUDGMENT
The world is dangerous and enemies are eerywhere­
everyone has to prtect themselves. A fortress seems the
safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it
protects youfrm-it cuts you off from valuable informa­
tion, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Bette
to circulate among people, find allies, mingle.  You are
shielded from your enemies b the crowd.
130

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Ch'in Shih Huag Ti, the first emperor of China (221-210 B.C.), was the
1'1                                                                                1 1-:                      \1 1,<')1                  1·:   01   1'1   1 1'.
mightiest man of his day. His empire was vaster and more power                     than
IU . I )                                                                           1)1-                       1'1'1                      1
that of Alexander the Great.  He had conquered all of the kingdoms sur­
The "Red Dealh " had
rounding his own kingdom of Ch'in  and unified them into  one massive
lung devaslated the
realm called China. But in the last years of his life, few, if anyone, saw hir.    cowllry. No pestilenee
The emperor lived in the most magnificent palace built to that date, in            had ever heen so fälal,
or so hideous. Blood
the capital of Hsien-yang. The palace had 270 pavilions; all of these were
was ils AVllar and its
connected by secret underground passageways, alowing the emperor to
seal-Ihe redness ami
move through the palace without anyone seeing him. He slept in a differ­           horror ofhlood. There
were sharp pains. and
ent room every night, and anyone who inadvertently laid eyes on hir was
sudden dizziness, a/l(1
instantly beheaded. Only a handfl of men knew his whereabouts, and if
then profuse hleeding
they revealed it to anyone, they, too, were put to death.                          al lhe pores. with
The first emperor had grown so terrified of human contact that when                dissolution                And
he had to leave the paace he taveled incognito, disguising hirself care­           Ihe whole seizure.
                                                                                   progress, and lermina­
flly. On one such tip through the provinces, he suddenly died. His body
                                                                                                              tirm ofIhe discase, were
was bore back to the capita in the emperor's cariage, with a cart paced            the incidents ofhalf an
with  salted fish  tailing  behind  it to  cover  up  the  smell  of the  rottng   how:
But the Prince Pro.\­
corpse-no  one was to  know of his  death.  He  died  alone,  fa from his
pero was happy ami
wives, his family, his fiends,  and his courtiers,  accompanied only by a
dauntless ami saga­
minister and a handfl of eunuchs.                                                  cious. When his dumin­
ions were half­
depopulated, he
Interpretation
summoned to his
Shih Huang Ti started off as the king of Ch'in, a fearless warrior of unbri­
presence a thol/sand
dled ambiton. Writers of the tme described hir as a man with "a waspish            haie and light-hearted
nose, eyes like slits, the voice of a j aca, and the heart of a tger or wolf."     friends from among Ihe
knights and dames of
He could be mercifl sometimes, but more often he "swallowed men up
his court. and with
wthout a scrupIe." It was through trickery and violence that he conquered
these retired to the deep
the provinces surrounding his own ad created China, forging a single na­           scclusion of one of his
tion ad culture out of many. He broke up the feudal system, and to keep            castellaled ahbeys. This
was an extensive lind
an     eye on the many members of the royal families that were  scattered
magnificent struclure.
across the realm's various kingdoms, he moved 120,000 of them to the cap­
the creation of the
ital, where he housed the most important courtiers in the vast palace of           prince's uwn eccenlric
Hsien-yang. He consolidated the many wals on the borders ad built them             yet august taste. A
strong and lofty wall
into the Great Wall of China. He standardized the country's laws, its writ­
girdled it in. Thio' wall
ten language, even the size of its cartwheels.
had gates of iron. The
As part of this process of unification, however, the first emperor out­            courtiers. havillg
lawed  the  writngs  and teachings  of Confucius,  the  philosopher  whose         elliered. hrought
fumaces and massy
ideas on the moral life had already become virtally a religion in Chinese
hammers and welded
culture. On Shih Huang Ti's order, thousands of books relatng to Conf­
the bolts. They resolved
cius were bured, and anyone who quoted Confcius was to be beheaded.                t leave meall.\ neither
This made many enemies for the emperor, and he grew constatly afaid,               ofingress nor ('gress to
                                                                                   the sudden impulses of
even paranoid. The executons mounted. A contemporary, the writer Han­
                                                                                   desp"ir or offren zy
fei-tzu, noted that "Ch'in has been victorious for four generatons, yet has        from within. The
lived in constant terror and apprehension of destuction."                          abbey was amply
As the emperor withdrew deeper and deeper into the palace to protect               provisioned. Wilh such
LAW 18                                                                             131

precautions the                                                                 hirself, he slowly lost control ofthe realm. Eunuchs and ministers enacted
(ollrtiers might hid
politcal policies without his approval or even his knowledge; they also
defiance 10 cOnlagion.
plotted against hir. By the end, he was emperor in name only, and was so
The external world
cOllld take care of                                                             isolated that barely anyone knew he had died. He had probably been poi­
itself In the meantime                                                          soned by the same scheming ministers who encouraged his isolation.
it was folly tu grieve,
That is what isolaton brings: Retreat into a fortress and you lose con­
or to think. The prince
tact with the sources of your power. You lose your ear for what is happen­
had provided all the
appliances ufpleasllre.                                                         ing around you, as weIl as a sense of proportion. Instead of being safer, you
There were huffoons,                                                            cut yourself off from the kind of knowledge on which your life depends.
there were impro­
Never enclose yourself so far from the streets that you cannot hear what is
visatori, (here were
happening around you, including the plots against you.
hallet-danee", there
wtre lnusician:;, lhere
was BeaUly, there was
wine. All these am}
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
seeurity were within.
Withol/t was the                                                                Louis XIV had the palace of Versailles built for hir and his court in the
"Red Death. "                                                                   1660s, and it was like no other royal palace in the world. As in a beehive,
It was toward the c10se
everything revolved around the royal person. He lived surrounded by the
of the fifth or sixth
nobility, who were allotted apartments nestled around his, their closeness
month ofhis secll/sion,
and while the pestilence                                                        to hir dependent on their rank. The king's bedroom occupied the literal
raged most furiol/sly                                                           center of the palace and was the focus of everyone's attention. Every mom­
abroad, that the Prince
ing the king was greeted in this room by a ritua known as the lever.
Prospero entertained
At eight A.M., the king's first valet, who slept at the foot of the royal
his thol/sand fricnds at
a masked ball of the                                                            bed, would awaken His Majesty. Then pages would open the door and
most unusual magnifi­                                                           admit those who had a fnction in the lever. The order of their entry was
cence. It was a VOlllP­
precise: First came the king's illegitimate sons and his grandcildren, then
tuous scene, that
the princes and princesses of the blood, ad then his physician and sur­
masquerade.
. . . Am} the revel went                                                        geon. There followed the grad officers of the wardrobe, the king's official
whirlingly on, until at                                                         reader, and those in charge of entertaining the king. Next would arrive var­
length there com­
ious govemment officials, in ascending order of rank. Last but not least
menccd the so unding
came those attending the lever by special invitation. By the end of the cere­
ofmidnight IIpon the
c1ock                                                                           A mi thus too,                                                                    mony, the room would be packed with weIl over a hundred royal atten­
it happened, perhaps,                                                                                                                                             dants and visitors.
that hefore the last
The day was organized so that all the palace's energy was directed at
cchoc.l· of the last ,hime
and passed through the king. Louis was constantly attended by courtiers
had llllerly sunk into
silenee, there were                                                             and officials, all asking for his advice and judgment. To   all their questions
many individuals in the                                                         he usually replied, "I shall see."
erowd who had found
As Saint-Simon noted, "If he tumed to someone, asked hir a ques­
leisure to beeome
tion, made an insignificant remark, the eyes of all present were tumed on
aware of the presence
ofa masked figllre                                                              this person. It was a distncton that was talked of and increaed prestige."
which had arrested the                                                          There was no possibility of privacy in the palace, not even for the king­
attention of no single
every room communicated with another, and every hallway led to larger
individual before.
rooms where groups of nobles gathered constantly. Everyone's actions
The figure was tall and
gaunt, am} shrouded                                                             were interdependent, and nothing and no one passed unnoticed: "The
from head to foot in                                                            king not only saw to it that all the high nobility was present at his court,"
the habilimenls ofthe
                                                                                wrote Saint-Simon, "he demanded the same of the minor nobility. At his
grave. The mask which
concealed the visage                                                            lever and coucher, at his meals, in his gardens of Versailles, he always looked
132                                                                             LAW 18

about hir, noticing everyting. He was offended if the most distinguished          was made so near/y to
resemb/e the counle­
nobles did not live permanently at court, and those who showed them­
                                                                                  nanee ofa stiffened
selves never or hardly ever, incurred his full displeasure. If one of these de­   corpse Ihal Ihe closest
sired something, the king would say proudly: 'I do not know hir,' and the         serutiny musl have had
dijcu/ty in detecting
judgment was irrevocable."
Ihe cheal. And >cl a/l
this might have heen
Interpretation                                                                    endured, ifnot
Louis XIV came to power at the end of a terrible civil wa, the Fronde. A          approved, by the mad
revellers around. Bul
principal instigator of the war had been the nobility, which deeply resented
the mummer had gone
te growing power of the throne ad yea                                             ed for the days of feudalism,
so jlr as to assume the
when the lords ruled their own fiefdoms and the king had little autority          Iype of the Red Death.
1/is vesture was
over them. The nobles had lost the civil war, but they remained a fractious,
dabbled in blood-and
resentfl lot.
his hroad brow, with all
                                                                                  The construction of Versailles, then, was far more than the decadent       the features of the face,
                                                                                  whim of a luxury-loving king. It served a crucia fncton: The king could    was sprink/ed with the
                                                                                                                                                             searlel horror
                                                                                  keep  an  eye and an ear  on everyone and evering aound hir. The
                                                                                                                                                             . . . A throng 0f the
                                                                                  once proud nobility was reduced to squabbling over the right to help the   revellers at once threw
king put on his robes in the mor                                                  ng. There was no possibility here of pri­                                  themselves inlo the
black apartment, amI,
vacy-no possibility of isolation. Louis XIV very early grasped the truth
seizing the mummer,
that for a king to isolate hirself is gravely dangerous. In his absence, con­
whose tall figure stood
spiracies will spring up like mushrooms after rain, animosities will crystal­     ereel and motion/ess
lize into factons, and rebellion will break out before he has the time to         wilhin the shadow of
the ebony clock, gasped
react. To    combat this, sociabilit and openness must not only be encour­
in unutterahle horror al
aged, they must be formally organized and canneled.
jnding the grave cere­
These conditions at Versailles lasted for Louis's entre reign, some               f                                                                          ments am/ eorpse-like
years of relative peace ad tranquillity. Through it all, not a pin dropped        mask, which they
handled wilh so violent
without Louis hearing it.
a mdeness, ulltenanted
hy any langible form.
Solitude is dangerous to reason, without beingjavorable to virtue                 And now was aeknowl­
edged the presence of
Remember that the solitary mortal is certainly luxurious,
Ihe Red Death. He had
probably superstitious, and possibly mad.
eome like a Ihief in Ihe
Dr. SamuelJohnson, 1 709- 1 784                                                   nighl. And one by one
dropped the revellers in
Ihe blood-hedewed
halls of their revel, and
died each in Ihe
KEYS TO POWER                                                                     despairing poslure of
                                                                                  his fall. And Ihe life  of
Machiavelli maes the argument that in a strictly military sense a fortress is
                                                                                  Ihe ebony c!ock welt
invariably a mistake. It becomes a symbol of power's isolation, and is an         out with that of Ihe lasl
easy target for its builders' enemies. Designed to defend you, fortesses ac­      ofIhe gay. Ami Ihe
tually cut you off fom help and cut into your flexibility. They may appear        flames of the tripods
                                                                                  expired. And Darkne.\·s
impregnable, but once you retire to one, everyone knows where you are;
                                                                                  and Decay and Ihe Red
ad a siege does not have to succeed to tur your fortress into a prison.           Dealh held illimilahle
Wit their small and confined spaces, fortresses are also extremely vulner­        dominion over all.
able to  the plague and contagious diseases. In a strategic sense, the iso­       THE M A S Q l J E  OF TIlE
                                                                                  RED DEATH.
lation  of a  fortress  provides  no  protection,  and  actually  creates  more   EDGAR ALLAN POl.
problems than it solves.                                                          1 809-1 849
LAW 18                                                                            1.3

Because humans are social creatures b y  nature, power depends o n  so­
cial interacton and circulaton. To   make yourself powerfl you must place
yourself at the center of things, as Louis XIV did at Versailles. All actvity
should revolve  aound you, and you should be aware of everything hap­
pening on the street, and of anyone who might be hatching plots aganst
you. The danger for most people comes when they feel threatened. In suc
times tey tend to reteat and  elose  ranks, to  find  securit in a kind of
fortess.  In  doing  so,  however,  they  come to  rely for  information  on a
smaller and smaler cirele, and lose perspective on events around them.
They lose maneuverability and become easy targets, and their isolaton
makes them paranoid. As in warfare and most games of stategy, isolaton
ofen precedes defeat ad death.
In moments of uncertainty and danger, you need to fight this desire to
tur inward. Instead, make yourself more accessible, seek out old allies and
make new ones, force yourself into more and more  different cireles. This
has been the tick of powerfl people for centuries.
The Roman statesman Cicero was bor into the lower nobility, and
had little chance of power unless he managed to make a place for himself
among the  aristocrats who contolled the city. He succeeded brilliantly,
identifing everyone wit influence and figuring out how they were con­
nected to one another. He mingled everywhere, knew everyone, and had
such a vast network of connections tat an  enemy here  could  eaily be
counterbalaced by an ally there.
The French statesman Talleyrand played the game the same way. Al­
though he came fom one of the oldest aristocratc families in France, he
made a point of always staying in touch with what was happening in the
streets of Paris, allowing him to foresee trends and troubles. He even got a
certain pleasure out of mingling with shady criminal types, who supplied
him with valuable information. Every time there was a crisis, a tansition of
power-the end of the Directory, the fall of Napoleon, the abdicaton of
Louis XVIII-he was able to survive and even trive, because he never
elosed himself up in a small cirele but aways forged connections with the
new order.
This law pertains to kings  ad  queens,  and to  those  of the  highest
power: The moment you lose contact wit your people, seeking security in
isolation, rebellion is brewing. Never imagine yourself so elevated that you
can afford to cut yourself off from even the lowest echelons. By reteatng
to a fortess, you make yourself an easy taget for your plotting subjects,
who view your isolaton as an insult and a reason for rebellion.
Since humans are such social creatures, it follows that the social arts
that make us pleasant to be around can be practced only by constant ex­
posure and circulaton. The more you are in contact with others, the more
gracefl and at ease you become. Isolaton, on the other had, engenders
an awkwardness in your gestures, and leads to frther isolation, as people
start avoiding you.
In 1545 Duke Cosimo I de' Medici decided that to ensure the immor-
134                                                                              LAW 18

tality of his name he would commission frescoes for the main capel of the
church of San Lorenzo in Florence. He had many great painters to choose
from, and in the end he piced Jacopo da Pontormo. Getting on in years,
Pontormo wanted to make these frescoes his chef d'oeuvre and legacy. His
first decision was to elose the capel off with walls, partitions, and blinds.
He wanted no one to witness the creaton of his masterpiece, or to steal his
ideas. He would outdo Michelangelo hirself. When some young men
broke into the chapel out of curiosity, Jacopo seaed it off even frther.
Pontormo filled the chapel's ceiling with biblical scenes-the Creation,
Adam and Eve, Noah's ark, on and on. At the top of the middle wall he
painted Christ in his majesty, raising the dead on Judgment Day. The artist
worked on the chapel for eleven years, rarely leaving it, since he had de­
veloped a phobia for human contact and was araid his ideas would be
stolen.
Pontormo died before completing the frescoes, and none of them has
survived. But the great Renaissace writer Vasari, a friend of Pontormo's
who saw the frescoes shortly after the artist's death, lef a description of
what they looked like. There was a total lack of proporton. Scenes
bumped against scenes, figures in one story beingjuxtaposed with those in
another, in maddening numbers. Pontormo had become obsessed with de­
tal but had lost any sense of the overall composition. Vasari lef off his de­
scription of the frescoes by writng that if he continued, "I think I would go
mad ad become entangled in this painting, just as I believe that in the
eleven years of time Jacopo spent on it, he entangled hirself and anyone
else who saw it." 1nstead of crowning Pontormo's career, the work became
his undoing.
These frescoes were visual equivalents of the effects of isolation on the
human mind: a loss of proportion, an obsession with detail combined with
an inability to see the larger picture, a kind of extravagant ugliness that no
longer communicates. Clearly, isolaton is as deadly for the creative arts as
for the social                                                                   a     .  Shakespeare is the most famous writer in history be­
cause, as a dramatst for the popular stage, he opened hirself up to the
masses, maing his work accessible to people no matter what their educa­
tion and taste. Artists who hole themselves up in their fortess lose a sense
of proporton, their work communicatng only to their small circle. Such
art remains comered and powerless.
Finally, since power is a human creation, it is inevitably increased by
contact with other people. 1nstead of falling into the fortress mentality,
view the world in the following manner: 1t is like a vast Versailles, with
every room communicatng with another. You need to be permeable, able
to float in and out of different circles and mix with different types. That
kind of mobility and social contact will protect you fom plotters, who will
be unable to keep secrets from you, and fom YOUf enemies, who will be
unable to isolate you from yoUf allies. Always on the move, you mix and
mingle in the rooms of the palace, never sitting or settling in one place. No
hunter can f his aim on such a swif-moving creature.
LAW 18                                                                           135

Image: The Fortress. High
up on the hill, the citadel be­
comes a symbol of all that is
hateful in power and authority.
The citizens of the town betray
you to the first enemy that comes.
Cut off from communication and in-
telligence, the citadel fals with ease.
Authority: A good and wise prince, desirous of maintaining that
character, and to avoid giving the opportunity to his sons to be­
come oppressive, will never build fortresses, so that they may
place their reliance upon the good will of their subjects, and not
upon the strength of citadels. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527)
REVERSAL
It is hardly ever right and propitous to choose isolaton. Without keeping
an ear on what is happening in the steets, you will be unable to protect
YOUfself. About the only thing that constant huma contact cannot facili­
tate is thought. The weight of society's pressure to conform, and the lack of
distance from other people, can make it impossible to think clearly ahout
what is going on around you. As a temporary reCOUfse, then, isolation can
help you to gan perspectve. Many a serious thinker has heen produced in
prisons, where we have nothing to do but think. Machiavelli could write
Te Pince only once he found hirself in exile ad isolated on a fam far
from the political intrigues of Florence.
The danger is, however, that this kind of isolation will sire all kinds of
stange and perverted ideas. You may gain perspective on the larger pic­
ture, hut you lose a sense of your own smalness and limitations. Also, the
more isolated you are, the harder it is to break out of YOUf isolaton when
you choose to-it sinks you deep into its quicksand without your noticing.
If you need time to think, then, choose isolation only as a last resort, and
only in small doses. Be carefl to keep YOUf way hack into society open.
136                                                                             LAW 18

LAW
19
KNOW WHO YOU'RE
D EALING WITH-
D O  NOT  OFFEND  THE
WRONG PERSON
JDDGMENT
There are many dieent kinds of peopl in the world,
and you can neuer assume that eueryone will react to
your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver
some peopl and the will spend the rest of their lives seek­
ing reuenge. The are wolves in lambs ' clothing. Choose
your victims and                                              oonents carqully,  then-neuer of
fend o deceive the wrong person.
137

OPPONENTS, SUCKERS, AND VICTIMS: Preliminary Typology
In your rise to  power you will come across many breeds  of opponent,
When you meet a
sucker, and victm. The highest form of the                                     a                                                                                       of power is the ability to dis­
,\'word"man, draw your
sword: Do not reeite                                                           tinguish the wolves from the lambs, the foxes from the hares, the hawks
poetry to une who is                                                           from the vultures. If you make this distncton weIl, you will succeed with­
notapoet.
out needing to  coerce  anyone  too  much.  But if you  deal  blindly  with
FROM A CH'AN
whomever crosses your path, you will have a life of constant sorrow, if you
BUDDHIST CLASSIC,
QlJOTED IN                                                                     even live that long.  Being able to recognize types of people, and to act ac­
THUNflER IN THE SKY,
cordingly, is critical. The following are the five most dangerous and diffi­
TRANSLATED BY
THOMAS CLEARY,  1 993                                                          cult   types   of  mark   in   the   jungle,   as   identfied   by   artsts-con   and
otherwise-of the past.
Te  Arrogant  and  Proud  Man.    Although he may initally disguise
it,  this  man's touchy pride  makes  hir  very  dagerous.  Any  perceived
slight will lead to a vengeance of overwhelming violence. You may say to
yourself,  "But I only said such-ad-such at a party, where everyone was
                                                                               '1'1 11-:  HU E\(;I·:                                                                   m
1.0                                                                            ' 1':                                                                                   1)1·:   I C I : I R R E                                                          drunk   " It does not matter. There is no sanity behind his overreaction,
                                                                               [Lope dei Aguirre's                                                                                                                                                              so do not waste tme trying to figure hir out. If at any point in your deal­
                                                                               eharaeter is amply                                                                                                                                                               ings with a person you sense an oversensitive and overactive pride, flee.
                                                                               illustrated in an anec­                                                                                                                                                          Whatever you are hoping for from hir isn't worth it.
                                                                               dote from the ehronicle
                                                                               of Gareilaso de la
                                                                               Vega, who related that                                                                                                                                                           Te Hopelessly Insecure Man.  This man is related to the proud and ar­
                                                                               in 1548 Aguirre was a                                                                                                                                                            rogant type, but is less violent and harder to spot. His ego is fagile, his
member ofa platoon of
sense of self insecure, ad if he feels hirself deceived or attaced, the hurt
soldiers eseorting
will simmer.  He will attack you in bites that will tae forever to  get big
Indian slaves from the
mines at Potosi                                                                enough for you to notce. If you find you have deceived or harmed such a
[Bolivia] to a royal                                                           man, disappear for a long tme. Do not stay around hir or he will nibble
treasu ry depot. The
you to death.
Indians were illegally
burdened with great
quantities ofsilver, and                                                       Mr. Suspicion.  Another variant on the breeds above, this is a fture Joe
a loeal offieial arrested                                                      Stalin. He sees what he wats to see-usually the worst-in other people,
Aguirre, senteneing
and imagines that everyone is after hir. Mr. Suspicion is in fact the least
him to reeeive two
dangerous of the three: Genuinely unbalanced, he is easy to deceive, just as
hundred lashes in heu
0/ a fine for oppressing                                                       Stalin hirself was constantly deceived. Play on his suspicious nature to get
the Indians. " The                                                             hir to tur against oter people. But if you do become the taget of his sus­
soldier Aguirre, having
picions, watch out.
received a notifieation
of the sentence,
besought Ihe aleaide                                                           Te  Serpent with  a Long Memory.  If hurt or deceived, this man will
that, instead offiogging                                                       show no anger on the surface; he will caculate and wait. Then, when he is
him, he would put him
in a positon to tur the tables, he will exact a revenge marked by a cold­
10 dealh, for that he
blooded shrewdness. Recognize this man by his calculaton and cunning in
was a gentieman by
birth                                                                          All this had                                                                            the different areas of his life. He is usually cold ad unaffectionate. Be dou­
no effeet on the aleaide,                                                                                                                                              bly carefl of tis snake, and if you have  somehow injured hir, either
who ordered the exeeu­
crush him completely or get hir out of your sight.
tioner to hring a heast,
and execute the
                                                                               sentence. The exeeu­                                                                    Te Plain, Unassuming, and Ofen Unintelligent Man.  A, your eas
                                                                               tioner eame to the                                                                      prick up when you find such a tempting victim. But this man is a lot harder
138                                                                            LAW 19

to     deceive than you imagine. Falling for a ruse ofen takes intelligence        prison, and put Aguirre
                                                                                   on the beast                                                        The
ad imaginaton-a sense of the possible rewards. The blunt man will
beast was driven on,
not take the bait because he does not recognize it. He is that unaware. The
and he received the
danger with this man is not that he will harm you or seek revenge, but             lashes                                                              "
rerely tat he will waste your tme, energy, resources, ad even your san­                                                                                When freed, Aguirre
announced his inten­
ity i tying to deceive him. Have a test ready for a mark-a joke, a story. If
tion ofkilling the offi­
his re action is utterly literal, this is the type you are dealing with. Contnue
eiai who had sentenced
at your own risk.                                                                  him, the aicalde
Esquivel. Esquivel:,
term of office expired
and he fled to Lima,
TRANSGRESSIONS OF THE LAW
three hundred twenty
leagues away, but
Transgression I                                                                    within fifteen days
                                                                                   Aguirre had tracked
In the early part of the thirteenth  century,  Muhammad,  the shah of
                                                                                   him there. The fright­
Khwarezm, maaged after many was to forge a huge empire, extending                  ened judge journeyed
west to present-day Turkey and south to Mghaistan. The empire's center             to Quito, a trip offour
h undred leagues, and in
was the great Asia capital of Samarkand. The sha had a power                       , well­
twenty days Aguirre
taned army, and could mobilize 200,000 warriors within days.
arrived.
In 1219 Muhammad received an embassy fom a new triba leader to                     " When Esquivel heard
te east, Genghis Khan. The embassy included all sorts of gifs to the great         ofhis presence, "
according to Garcilaso,
Muhammad, representng the finest goods fom Khan's small but growing
"he made another jour­
Mongoi empire. Genghis Khan wanted to reopen the Silk Route to Europe,
ney offive hundred
and offered to share it with Muh                                                   a                                                                   ad, while promising peace between                                  leagues to Cuzco; but
the two empires.                                                                                                                                                                                                          in a few days Aguirre
also arrived, having
Muhamad did not know this upstart from the east, who, it seemed to
travelled on foot and
hir, was extemely arrogant to ty to talk as an equal to one so clearly his
without shoes, saying
superior. He ignored Khan's offer. Khan tried again: This tme he sent a            that a whipped man
caava of a hundred camels filled with the rarest articles he had plun­             has no business to ride
a horse, or to go where
dered from China. Before the caravan reached Muhammad, however,
he would be seen by
Inachik, the govemor of a region bordering on Samarkand, seized it
others. In this way,
for hirself, ad executed its leaders.                                              Aguirre followed his
Genghis Khan was sure that this was a mistake-tat Inachik had                      judge for three years,
and four months. "
acted without Muhammad's approval.  He  sent yet  another mission to
Wearying of the
Muh                                                                                a                                                                   ad, reiteratng his offer ad asking that the govemor be punished.
pursuit, Esquivei
                                                                                   Tis tme Muhammad hirself had one of the ambassadors beheaded, and   remained at Cuzco, a
sent the other two back with shaved heads                                          a horrifing insult in the Mon­                                      city so stemly govemed
that he feit he would be
goI code of honor. Khan sent a message to the shah: "You have chosen war.
safe from Aguirre. He
What will happen                                                                   w                                                                   happen, and what it is to be we know not; only God
took a house near the
knows." Mobilizing his forces, in  1220 he attacked Inachik's province,            cathedral and never
where he seized the capital, captured the govemor, and ordered hir exe­            ventured outdoors
without a sword and a
cuted by having molten silver poured into his eyes ad eas.
dagger. "However, on a
Over the next year, Khan led a series of guerrilla-like campaigns
certain Monday, at
aganst the sha's much lager army. His method was totaly novel for the              noon, Aguirre entered
tre-his soldiers could move very fast on horsebac, and had mastered                his house, and having
walked all over it, and
the art of firing with bow and arrow while mounted. The speed and flexi­
having traversed a
bility of his forces alowed hir to deceive Muhamad as to his intentons
corridor, a saloon, a
ad the directons of his movements. Eventually he managed first to sur-             chamber, and an inner
                                                                                   LAW 19                                                              139

chamber where Ihe                                                                 round Samarkand, ten to seize it. Muhammad fled, and a year later died,
judge kepl his books,
his vast empire broken ad destroyed, Genghis Khan was sole master of
he al last found him
Samarkand, the Silk Route, and most of norther Asia.
asleep over one of his
books, and stabbed him                                                            Interpretation
10 death. The murderer                                                            Never assure that the person you ae dealing with is weaker or less impor­
then went out, but
tant than you are. Some men ae slow to take offense, whic may make
when he came to the
you misjudge the tickness of teir skin, ad fail to worry about insulting
door of the house, he
found that he had                                                                 them. But should you offend their honor and teir pride, tey wil over­
forgotten his hat, and                                                            whelm you with a violence that seems sudden and extreme given their
had the temerity to
                                                                                  slowness to anger. If you want to tur people down, it is best to do so po­
return and fetch it, and
then walked down                                                                  litely and respectfully, even if you feel their request is impudent or teir
the street."                                                                      offer ridiculous. Never reject them with an insult untl you know them bet­
THE GüLDEN DREAM:                                                                 ter; you may be dealing wit a Genghis Kha.
SEEKERS OF EL DORADO,
WALKER CHAPMAN,
1 967                                                                             Transgression I I
In te late 1910s some ofthe best swindlers in America formed a con-artist
ring based in Denver, Colorado. In te winter months tey would spread
across the souther states, plying their trade. In 1920 Joe Furey, a leader of
the ring, was working his way through Texas, making hundreds of thou­
sands of dolars with classic con games. I Fort Wort, he met a sucker
named J. Frank Norfleet, a cattleman who owned a large ranch. Norfleet
TIIE CHO\ A'D
fell for te con. Convinced of the riches to come, he empted his bank ac­
TBE SIH:r·:p
count of $45,000 and handed it over to Furey and his confederates. A few
A troublesome Crow
seated herself on the                                                             days later tey gave him his "millions," which tumed out t be a few good
back of a Sheep. The                                                              dollars wrapped around a packet of newspaper clippings.
Sheep, much against his                                                           Furey and his men had worked such cons a hundred times before, and
will, carried her back­
te sucker was usually so embarrassed by his gullibility that he quietly
ward and forward for a
leaed his lesson and accepted te loss. But Norfleet was not like oter
long time, and at last
said, "lfyou had                                                                  suckers. He went to the police, who told hir there was little they could do.
treated a dog in this
"Then 1'1 go after tose people myself," Norfleet told the detectives. "1'11
way, you would have
get them, too, if it takes the rest of my life." His wife took over the ranc as
had your deserts from
his sharp teeth. " To   this                                                      Norfleet scoured the country, looking for others who had been fleeced in
the Crow replied, "1                                                              the same game. One such sucker came forward, and the two men idented
despise the weak, and
one of te con asts in San Francisco, and maaged to get hir locked up.
yield to the strong. 1
The man committed suicide rather tha face a long term in prison.
know whom 1 may
bully, and whom 1 must                                                            Norfleet kept going. He tracked down anoter of the con artsts in
fialter; and thus 1 hope                                                          Montana, roped him like a caf, and dragged hir through te muddy streets
to prolong my life to a
to te town jail. He traveled not only across the county but to England,
good old age.
Caada, and Mexico in search of Joe Furey, and also of Furey's right-hand
FABLES,
AESOP,                                                                            man, W B. Spencer. Finding Spencer in Montrea, Norfleet chased                 h
SIXTH CENTlJRY B.e.                                                               through the streets. Spencer escaped but the rancher stayed on his trail ad
caught up wit him in Salt Lae City. Preferring the mercy of te law to
Norfleet's wrath, Spencer tured hirself in.
Norfleet found Furey in Jacksonville, Florida, and personally hauled
him off to face justice in Texas. But he wouldn't stop there: He continued
on to Denver, determined to break up the entre ring. Spending not only
140                                                                               LAW 19

large sums of money but another year of his life in the pursuit, he managed
t put all of the con ring's leaders behind bars. Even some he didn't catch
ha grown so terrified of hir that they too tured themselves in.
Ater fve years of hunting, Norfleet had single-hadedly destroyed the
eounty's largest confederation of con atists. The effort bankrupted hir
ad ruined his marriage, but he died a satsfied man.
Interpretation
Most men accept the humiliaton of being conned with a sense of resigna­
ton. They leam their lesson, recognizing that there is no such thing as a
fee lunch, and that they have usually been brought down by their own
greed for easy money. Some, however, refse to take their medicine. In­
stead of reflectng on their own gullibility and avarice, they see themselves
a totally innocent victims.
Men like this may seem to be crusaders for justice and honesty, but
tey are actually immoderately insecure. Being fooled, being conned, has
actvated their self-doubt, and tey are desperate to repair the damage.
Were the mortgage on Norfleet's ranch, the collapse of his marriage, ad
te years of borrowing money and living in cheap hotels worth his revenge
over his embarrassment at being fleeced? To    the Norfleets of the world,
overcoming their embarassment is worth ay price.
All people have insecurites, and often the best way to deceive a sucker
is to play upon his insecurites. But in the realm of power, everything is a
queston of degree, and the person who is decidedly more insecure than
te average mortal presents great dangers. B waed: If you practce de­
eepton or tickery of any sort, study your mark weIl. Some people's inse­
eut and ego fragility cannot tolerate the slightest offense. To   see if you
ae dealing with such a type, test them first-make, say, a mild joke at their
exense. A confident person will iaugh; an overly insecure one will react as
i personally insulted. If you suspect you are dealing with this type, find an­
oter victm.
Transgression III
In te fifth century B.C., Ch'ung-erh, the prince of Ch'in (in present-day
China), had been forced into exile. He lived modestly-even, sometmes,
i poverty-waitng for the time when he could retur hore and resure
hs princely life. Once he was passing through the state of Cheng, where
te mler, not knowing who he was, treated hir rudely. The ruler's minis­
ter, Shu Chan, saw this ad said, "This man is a worthy prince. May Your
Higness treat hir with great courtesy and thereby place hir under an
obligation!" But the ruler, able to see only the prince's lowly station, ig­
nored tis advice and insulted the prince again. Shu Chan again wared
hs master, saying, "If Your Highness cannot treat Ch'ung-erh with cour­
tesy, you should put hir to death, to avoid calamity in the fture." The
mler only scoffed.
Years later, the prince was finally able to retur hore, his circum­
stces greatly changed. He did not forget who had been kind to hir, and
LAW 1 9                                                                          141

who had been insolent, during his years o f poverty. Least o f  a1l did h e  for­
get his treatment at te hands of te ruler of Cheng. At h first opportunity
he assembled a vast army ad marched on Cheng, taking eight eites, de­
stroying the kingdom, ad sending the ruler into an exile of his own.
Interpretation
You can never be sure who you are dealing wit. A ma who i of litde im­
portance and meas today can be a person of power tomorrow. We forget
a lot in our lives, but we rarely forget an insult
How was the ruler of Cheng to know tat Pince Ch'ung-erh was an
ambitous, calculatng, cunning type, a serpent with a long memory? There
was realy no way for him to know, you may say-but since there was no
way, it would have been better not to tempt the fates by finding out. There
is noting to be gained by insulting a person unnecessarily.  Swalow the
impulse to offend, even i the oter person seems wea. The satsfaction i
meager compared to te danger that someday he or she will be in a posi­
tion to hurt you.
Transgression IV
The yea of 1920 had been a particularly bad one for America                         a         deaers.
Big buyers-te robber-baon generation of the previous centry-were
getting to an age where tey were dying off like flies, and no new                   rllion­
aires had emerged to take their place. Things were so bad tat a number of
te major deaers  decided to pool teir resources, an unheard-of event,
since                                                                               a         dealers usualy get along like cats and dogs.
Joseph Duveen,                                                                      a         dealer to the ricest tycoons of America, was suf­
fering more tha the others that year, so he deeided to go along with this
aiance. The group now consisted of the five biggest dealers in te county.
Looking around for a new client, tey deeided that teir last best hope was
Henry Ford, ten te weatiest man in America. Ford had yet to venture
into the art maket, and he was suc a big target that it made sense for them
to work togeter.
The deaers deeided to assemble a list, "The 100 Greatest Paintings in
the World" (a1l of which they happened to have in stock) , and to offer te
lot of them to Ford. Wit one purchase he could make himself the world's
greatest collector. The consortum worked for weeks to produce a ma                  ifi­
cent object: a three-volume set of books containing beautful reproductions
of the paintings, as well as scolaly texts accompanying eac picture. Next
they made  a persona visit to Ford at his  home  in Dearbom, Michigan.
There tey were surprised by the simplicity of his house: Mr. Ford was ob­
viously an extremely unaffected man.
Ford received them in his study.  Looking  trough te book, he ex­
pressed astonishment and delight. The exeited dealers began imagining the
millions of dollars tat would short1y flow into their coffers. Finaly, how­
ever, Ford looked up fom te book and sad, "Gendemen, beaut                          l books
like these, wit beautfl colored pictures like these, must cost an  awfl
lot!" "But Mr. Ford!" exclaimed Duveen, "we don't expect you to buy tese
142                                                                                 LAW 1 9

books. We   got them up especially for you, to show you the pietures. These
books are a present to you." Ford seemed puzzled. "Gentlemen," he said,
"it is extemely nice of you, but I really don't see how I can accept a beau­
tl, expensive present like this from stangers." Duveen explained to Ford
tat the reproductons in the books showed paintngs they had hoped to
seIl to hir. Ford finally understood. "But gentlemen," he exclaimed, "what
would I want with the original pietures when the ones right here in these
books are so beautifl?"
Interpretation
Joseph Duveen prided hirself on studying his victims and clients in ad­
vace, figuring out their weaknesses and the peculiarites of their tastes be­
fore he ever met them. He was driven by desperaton to drop this tactic just
once, in his assault on Henry Ford. It took hir months to recover from his
misjudgment,  both  mentaly  ad  monetarily.  Ford  was  the  unassuming
plain-man                                                                        te who just isn't worth the bother. He was the inc             aaton of
tose literal-minded folk who do not possess enough imaginaton to be de­
eeived. From then on, Duveen saved his energies for the Mellons ad Mor­
gs of the world-men crafy enough for hir to entrap in his snares.
KEYS TO POWER
Te ability t o  meaSUfe people and t o  know who you're dealing with i s  the
most import                                                                      t skill of all in gathering and conserving power. Without it
you are blind: Not only will you off end the wrong people, you will choose
te wrong types to work on, and will think you are flattering people when
you are actualy insultng them. Before embarking on any move, take the
measure of YOUf mark or potential opponent. Otherwise you will waste
tme and make mistaes. Study people's weaknesses, the cinks in their
aor, their areas of both pride and insecurity. Know their ins and outs be­
fore you even decide whether or not to deal with them.
Two final words of cauton: First, in judging and measuring your oppo­
nent, never rely on your instincts. You will make the greatest mistaes of al
i you rely on such inexact indicators. Nothing can substitute for gathering
eonerete knowledge. Study and spy on YOUf opponent for however long it
tkes; this will pay off in the long run.
Second, never tust appearaces. Anyone with a serpent's heat can
use a show of kindness to cloak it; a person who is blustery on the outside is
ofen really a coward. Leam to see through appearaces and their conta­
cetons. Never trust the version that people give of themselves-it is ut­
tery unreliable.
LAW 19                                                                           143

Image :  The  Hunter.  He does  not lay  the
same trap for a wolf as for a fox. He does
not  set  bait  where  no  one  will  take  it.
He  knows  his  prey thoroughly,  its  habits
and   hideaways,   and   hunts   aeeordingly.
Authority: Be eonvineed, that there  are no
persons so insignifieant and ineonsiderable,
but may, some time or other, have it in their
power to be of use to you; whieh they eer­
tainly will not, if you have onee shown them
eontempt.  Wrongs  are  ofen  forgiven,  but
eontempt never  iso  Our pride  remembers
it for ever.                                                                   (Lord  Chesterfield,   1694-1773)
REVERSAL
What possible good ean eome fom ignoraee about other people? La
to tell te Hons from the lambs or pay the priee. Obey this law to its fllest
extent; it has no reversa-do not boter looking for one.
14      LAW 19

LAW
20
D O  NOT  COMMIT
TO ANYONE
JUDGMENT
It is thefool who always rshes to take sides. Do not com­
mit to any side or cause but yoursel By maintaining
your indeendence, you become the mastr of  others­
playing peole against  one  another  making them
pursue you.
145

PART I :  D O  N OT C O M M IT T O  ANYO N E ,
BUT BE COURTED BY ALL
If you allow people to feel the possess you to any degee, you lose all power
ove them. By    not committing your affections, the will only tr harder to
win you over. Stay aloof and you gain the power that comes from their at­
tention andJstrated desire. Ply the Virgn Queen: Give them hope but
never satisfaction.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Wen Queen Elizabet I ascended the throne of Englad, in 1558, there
was much to-do about her finding a husband. The issue was debated in Pa­
liament, and was a main topic of conversaion among Englishmen of all
classes; they ofen dsagreed as t whom she should marry, but everyone
thought she should mary as soon as possible, for a queen must have a
king, and must bea heirs for the kingdom. The debates raged on for yeas.
Meanwhile the most handsome and eligible bacelors in the ream-Sir
Robert Dudley, te Earl of Essex, Sir Water Raleigh-vied for Elizabet's
hand. She did not discourage tem, but she seemed to be in no hurry, ad
her hints as to which man might be her favorite often contadicted eac
oter.  In  1566, Palia                                                         ent sent a delegaton to  Elizabet urging her to
marry before she wa too old to bear cildren. She did not argue, nor did
she discourage te delegaton, but she remained a virgin noneteless.
The delicate game tat Elizabet played wit her suitors slowly made
her the subj ect of innumerable sexua fantasies and te object of cultsh
worship. The court physician, Simon Forman, used his diary to describe
his drea                                                                       s of deflowering her. Painters represented her as Diana and oter
goddesses. The poet Edmund Spenser a'"d oters wrote eulogies t the Vir­
gin Queen. She was referred to as "thc world's Empresse," "tat virtuous
Virgo" who rules the world and sets the stars in motion. In conversation
wit her,  her many mae  suitors  would  employ bold sexua innuendo, a
dare that Elizabeth did not discourage. She did a she could to str teir in­
terest and simultaeously keep them at bay.
Throughout Europe, kings and princes knew tat a mariage wit Eliz­
abeth would sea an alliance between Englad ad any nation. The king of
Spa                                                                            wooed her, a did te prince of Sweden and te archduke of Austria.
She politely refused tem at
The great diplomate issue of Elizabeth's day was posed by te revolt
of the Flemish ad Dutch Lowlands, which were then possessions of Spain.
Should England brea its aliance with Span and choose France a its main
ally on the Contnent, thereby encouraging Flemish and Dutch indepen­
dence? By 1570 it had come to seem that a aliance wit France would be
England's wisest course. France had two eligible men of noble blood, the
dukes of Anjou and Alencon, broters of the French king. Would eiter of
tem marry Elizabet? Both had advantages, and Elizaeth kept the hopes
of both alive. The issue simmered for years. The duke of Anjou made sev-
146                                                                            LAW 20

eral visits to Englad, kissed Elizabeth in public, even called her by pet
n                                                                                aes; she appeaed to requite his affectons. Meanwhile, as she flirted
with  te  two  broters,  a treaty was  signed  that  sealed  peace  between
Frace  and  England.  By   1582 Elizabeth  feit  she  could  break  off the
courtship. In the case of the duke of Anjou in partcular, she did so with
great  relief:  For  the  sake  of diplomacy  she  had  aHowed  herself to  be
courted by a man whose presence she could not stand  and whom  she
found physically repulsive. Once peace between France ad England was
secure, she dropped the unctuous duke as politely as she could.
By this time Elizabeth was too old to bear children. She was accord­
ingly able to live te rest of her life as she desired, ad she died te Vrrgin
Queen. She lef no direct heir, but mIed through a period of incomparable
peace and cultural fertlity.
Interpretation
Elizabeth had good reason not to marry: She had witessed te mistakes of
Mary Queen of Scots, her cousin. Resisting the idea of being mIed by a
woma, the Scots expected Mary to mary ad marry wisely. To   wed a for­
eiger would be  unpopular; to favor any  partcular  noble house would
open up terrible rivalries. In the end May chose Lord Damley, a Catholic.
In    doing so she incurred the wrath of Scotland's Potestants, and endless
trmoil ensued.
Elizabeth knew that mariage can ofen lead to a female mler's undo­
ing: By marrying and committng to an alliace wit one party or naton,
te queen becomes embroiled in conflicts that are not of her choosing, con­
fiets which may eventually overwhelm her or lead her into a ftle war.
Also, the husband becomes the de facto mler, and ofen ties to do away
wth  his  wife  the  queen,  as Damley tried to get  rid of Mary.  Elizabeth
lea                                                                              ed the lesson weH. She had two goas as a mier: to a- -oid marriage and
to avoid war. She managed to combine these goas by tngling the possi­
bility of marriage in order to forge alliaces. The moment she committed
to any single suitor would have been the moment she lost her power. She
had  to  emanate  mystery  ad desirability,  never  discouraging  anyone's
hopes but never yielding.
Through  this  lifelong ga                                                       e  of flirtng  ad  withdrawing,  Elizabeth
dominated the county and every man who sought to conquer her. As te
center of attention, she was in contro!. Keeping her independence above
al, Elizabeth protected her power ad made herself an object of worship.
I would rather be a beggar and single than a queen and married.
Queen Elizabeth I, 1533-1 603
KEYS TO POWER
Since power depends greatly on appearances, you must leam te tics
tat will enhace your image. Refsing to commit to a person or group is
one of these. When you hold yourself bac, you incur not anger but a kind
LAW 2 0                                                                          147

of respect. You instantly seem powerfl because you make yourself un­
graspable, rather than succumbing to the group, or to the relatonship, as
most people do. This aura of power only grows with tme: As your reputa­
tion for independence grows, more and more people will come to desire
you, wating to be the one who gets you to commit. Desire is like a virus: If
we see that someone is desired by oter people, we tend to find this person
desirable too.
The moment you commit, the magic is gone. You become like every­
one else. People will try all kinds of underhaded methods to get you to
commit. They will give you gifts, shower you with favors, all to put you
under obligaton. Encourage the attention, stmulate their interest, but do
not commit at ay cost. Accept the gifts and favors if you so desire, but be
carefl to maintain your inner aloofness. You cannot inadvertently allow
yourself to feel obligated to anyone.
Remember, tough: The goal is not to put people off, or to make it seem
that you are incapable of commitent.                                            Ue the Virgin Queen, you need to
str the pot, excite interest, lure people with the possibility of having you.
You have to bend to their attenton occasionally, then-but never too far.
The Greek soldier and statesman Alcibiades played this game to per­
fecton. It was Alcibiades who inspired and led the massive Athenian ar­
mada that invaded Sicily in 414 B.C. When envious Athenians back hore
tried to bring hir down by accusing hir of tumped-up carges, he de­
fected to te enemy, the Spartans, instead of facing a tia bac hore. Then,
afer the Athenians were defeated at Syracuse, he lef Sparta for Persia, even
though the power of Sparta was now on the rise. Now, however, both the
Athenians and the Spartans courted Alcibiades because of his influence
with the Persians; and the Per lans showered hir with honors because of
his power over the Athenians and the Spartans. He made promises to every
side but committed to none, ad in the end he held all the cards.
If you aspire to power and influence, ty the Alcibiades tactc: Put
yourself in the middle between competng powers. Lure one side with the
promise of your help; the other side, aways wantng to outdo its enemy,
will pursue you as weIl. As each side vies for your attenton, you will im­
mediately seem a person of great influence and desirability. More power
will accrue to you than i you had rashly committed to one side. To   perfect
this tactc you need to keep yourself inwadly fee fom emotonal entan­
glements, and to view all those around you as pawns in your rise to the top.
You cannot let yourself become the lackey for any cause.
In the midst of te 1968 U.S. presidenta electon, Henry Kissinger
made a phone call to Richad Nixon's team. Kissinger had been allied with
Nelson RockefeIler, who had unsuccessflly sought the Republican nomina­
ton. Now Kissinger offered to supply te Nixon camp with valuable inside
informaton on te negotatons for peace in Vieta that were ten going
on in Paris. He had a man on the negotatng tea keeping rum informed of
the latest developments. The Nion team gladly accepted his offer.
At the same tme, however, Kissinger aso approached the Democratc
nominee, Hubert Humphrey, ad offered his aid. The Humphrey people
148                                                                             LAW 20

asked hir for inside informaton on Nixon and he supplied it. "Look,"
Kssinger told Humphrey's people, "I've hated Nixon for yeas." In fact he
had no interest in either side. What he really wanted was what he got: the
promise of a high-level cabinet post from both Nixon and Humphrey.
Whichever man won the electon, Kissinger's career was secure.
The winner, of course, was Nixon, ad Kissinger duly went on to his
cabinet post. Even so, he was carefl never to appear too much of a Nixon
man. When Nixon was reelected in 197, men much more loyal to hir
than Kissinger were fired. Kissinger was aso the only Nixon high official to
suive Watergate and serve under the next president, Gerald Ford. By
maintaining a little distance he thrived in turbulent tmes.
Those who use this strategy often notice a strange phenomenon:
People who rush to the support of others tend to gain little respect in the
process, for their help is so easily obtained, while those who stad back
fd themselves besieged with supplicants. Their aloofness is powerl, and
everyone wants them on their side.
When Picasso, after early years of poverty, had become the most suc­
cessfl artist in the world, he did not commit hirself to this dealer or that
dealer, although they now besieged hir fom all sides with attactive offers
ad gand promises. Instead, he appeared to have no interest in their ser­
vices; this technique drove them wild, and as they fought over hir his
prces only rose. When Henry Kissinger, as U.S. secretary of state, wated
to reach dHente with the Soviet Union, he made no concessions or concil­
iator gestures, but courted China instead. This infriated ad also scared
the Soviets-they were already politca 11y isolated and feared frther isola­
ton if the United States and China_ cae together.  Kissinger's move
pushed them to the negotiatng table. The tactic has a parallel in seduction:
When you want to seduce a woman, Stendhal advises, court her sister first.
Stay aoof and people will come to you. It will become a chalienge for
them to win your affectons. As long as you imitate the wise Virgin Queen
ad stmulate their hopes, you will remain a magnet of attenton ad desire.
Image:
The Virgn Queen.                                                               Authort:   Do   not  commit
The center of attention,                                                       yourself to anybody or any­
desire, and worship. Never                                                     thing, for that is to be a slave, a
succumbing to one suitor or the                                                slave to every man                    Above
other, the Virgin Queen keeps                                                  all, keep yourself fee of com­
them all revolving around                                                      mitments   and   obligatons­
her Iike planets, unable to                                                    they are the device of anoter
Ieave her orbit but never                                                      to get you into his power
getting any eloser                                                             (Baltasar Graciä, 1601-1658)
to her.
LAW 20                                                                         149

PART I I :  D O  N OT C O MM IT T O  ANYO NE-
STAY ABOVE T H E  F RAY
Do not let peole drag you into their petty fights and squabbles. Seem inte­
ested and suportive, but find a way to remain neutral; lt others do the
fighting while you stand back, watch and wait. len the fighting parties
are good and tired the will be ripe for the picking. You can make it a pa­
tice, in fact, to stir up quarrels between othe peol, and then offer to medi­
ate, gaining powe a the go-between.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
1                                                                               1                                                                           1 I',  I-II I,S                                                              TIW   In the late fifeenth century, the stongest city-states in Itay-Venice, Flo­
CHOI O.  \ ' )  TI I i':  FO\
rence, Rome, ad Milan-found temselves constanty squabbling. Hover­
The kiles and t h e  crows                                                      ing above their struggles were the natons of France ad Span, ready to
made an agreement
grab whatever tey could fom the weakened Italian powers. And trapped
among themselves thaI
in the middle was the smal state of Matua, roled by the young Duke
Ihev sfwlIlc go halves
in everWhing ohlained                                                           Giafrancesco  Gonaga.   Mantua  was  stategically  located  i  norther
in the fo resI, Olle day
Italy, and it seemed only a matter of time before one of the powers swal­
thev saw a }tu that had
lowed it up and it ceased to exist as a independent kingdom.
heen w01/fzded hy
Gonzaga was a fierce warrior and a skilled commander of troops, and
hunters Iying helpless
umler a tree, ami gath­                                                         he became a kind of mercenary general for whatever side paid hir best. In
ered round it.                                                                  the yea 1490, he maried Isabella d'Este, daughter of the roler of another
The crows said, " We
                                                                                small  Italian duchy,  Ferraa.  Since he now spent most of his  tme away
will take the lIpper half
of Ihe fox. " " Then we                                                         fron  Mantua, it fell to Isabella to rule i his stead.
will take the lower                                                             Isabella's first true test as roler came in 1498, when King Louis XII of
half " said the kites.
Frace was preparing armies to attack Milan. In their usual perfidious fash­
The fox  laughed at this,
ion, the  Italian states immediately looked for ways to profit fom Milan's
and said, "I always
Ihollghl the kites were                                                         difficulties. Pope Alexander VI promised not to intervene, thereby giving
superiur in creltion to                                                         the French cate blache. The Venetas signaled that they would not help
the crows; as StIch they
Milan, eiter-and in exchange for this, they hoped te French would give
must get the IIpper half
them Matua. The roler of Milan, Lodovico Sforza, suddenly found him­
ofmy hody, ofwhich
my head, with Ihe hrain                                                         self alone ad abandoned. He tured to Isabella d'Este, one of his dosest
aruf other delicale                                                             fiends (also romored to be his lover), and begged her to persuade Duke
things in it, Flrms a
Gonzaga to come to h ad. Isabella tied, but her husband balked, for he
portion. "
Louis swooped down on                                                           saw Sforza's cause as hopeless. And so, in 1499,
"Oh, yes,  that is  right, "
said the kites, "we will                                                        Mila and took it wit ease.
have  that parI of the                                                          Isabella now faced a dilemma:  I she stayed loya to Lodovico, the
FIX. " "Not at all, " said
French would now move against her. But if, instead, she allied herself wit
the crows, " we must
Frace, she would mae enemies elsewhere in Italy, compromising Man­
have it, as already
agreed. " Then a war                                                            tua once Louis eventaly withdrew. And if she looked to Venice or Rome
arose hetween (he rival                                                         for help, tey would simply swallow up Mantua under the doak of coming
partie,\, and a grellt
to her ad. Yet she had to do someting. The mighty king of Frace was
nzany fell on hoth sides,
breathing down her  neck:  She decided to befriend him,  as she had be­
and (he renz{,;ning few
                                                                                escaped with dijjicufly.                                                    fiended Lodovico Sforza before him-with aluring gifs, witty, intelligent
                                                                                The fox conlifllied                                                         letters,  ad the possibility of her company,  for Isabella was famous as a
                                                                                there for some days,
                                                                                                                                                            woman of incomparable beauty ad charm.
150                                                                             LAW 20

In 1500 Louis invited Isabella to a great party in Milan to celebrate his      leisurely feeding on the
dead kites and crows.
victory. Leonardo da Vinci built an enormous mechaica lion for the af­
and then left the place
far: When the lion opened its mouth, it spewed fesh lilies, the symbols of
haie and hearty,
French royalty. At the part Isabella wore one of her celebrated dresses        observing, "The weak
(she had by far the largest wardrobe of any of the Italian princesses), and    benefit by the quarrels
ofthe mighty. "
just as she had hoped, she charmed and captivated Louis, who ignored all
INDIAN FABLES
te other ladies vying for his attention. She soon became his constant com­
panion, and in exchange for her fiendship he pledged to protect Mantua's
independence from Venice.
As one danger receded, however, another, more worrying one aose,
tis time from the south, in the form of Cesare Borgia. Starting in 1500,
Borgia had marched steadily nortward, gobbling up al the small king­
doms in his path in the name of his father, Pope Alexander. Isabella under­    Men of great abi!ities
are slow to aet, for it is
stood  Cesare perfectly: He  could be neither trusted nor in any way
easier to avoid oeea­
offended. He had to be cajoled and kept at arm's length. Isabella began by
sions for committing
sending hir gifs-falcons, prize dogs, perfmes, and dozens of masks,            yourself than to come
which she knew he always wore when he walked the streets of Rome. She          weil out of a commit­
ment. Such oceasions
sent messengers with flattering greetings (although these messengers also
test your judgment; it i5
ated as her spies). At one point Cesare asked if he could house some
safer to avoid them
toops in Mantua; Isabella managed to dissuade hir politely, knowing fll        than to emerge victori­
weIl that once the troops were quartered in the city, tey would never          ous fram them. One
obligation leads to a
leave.
greater one, and you
Even while Isabella was charming Cesae, she convinced everyone
come very near to the
around her to take care never to utter a harsh word about hir, since he        brink ofdisaster.
had spies everywhere and would use the slightest pretext for invasion.         BALTASAR GRAClAN,
1601-1658
When Isabella had a child, she asked Cesare to be the godfather. She even
dagled in front of hir the possibility of a marriage between her faily
ad his. Somehow it all worked, for although elsewhere he seized every­
ting in his path, he spared Mantua.
In 1503 Cesare's father, Alexander, died, and a few years later the new
pope, Julius 11, went to war to drive the French toops fom Italy. When
te mler of Ferrara-Alfonso, Isabella's brother-sided with the French,
Julius decided to attack and humble hir. Once again Isabella found herself
i the middle: the pope on one side, the French ad her brother on the
other. She dared not ally herself with either, but to offend either would be
equally disastrous. Again she played the double game at which she had be­
come so expert. On the one hand she got her husbad Gonzaga to fight for
te pope, knowing he would not fight very hard. On the other she let
French troops pass through Matua to come to Ferrara's aid. While she
publidy complained that the French had "invaded" her territory, she pri­
vately supplied them with valuable information. To    make the invasion
plausible to Julius, she even had the French pretend to plunder Mantua. It
worked once again: The pope lef Mantua alone.
In 1513,                                                                       ar a lengthy siege, Julius defeated Ferrara, and the French
toops withdrew. Wor out by the effort, the pope died a few months later.
Wit his death, the nightarish cyde of battles and petty squabbles began
to  repeat itself.
LAW 20                                                                         151

A great deal chaged in ltaly during Isabella's reign: Popes came and
went, Cesae Borgia rose and then fell, Venice lost its empire, Milan was in­
TI [1 EACLE AN!) THE sm
vaded, Florence fell into decline, and Rme was sacked by the Hapsburg
An eagle built a nest on
Emperor Charles V Through all this, tiny Mantua not only survived but
a tree, and hatched out
thrived, its court the envy of Italy. Its wealt and sovereignty would remain
some eaglets. And a
wild sow brought her                                                           intact for a century afer Isabella's death, in 1539.
litter under the tree.
The eagle used to fly
Interpretation
off after her prey, and
Isabella d'Este understood Italy's politcal situaton with amazing claity:
bring it back to her
young. And the sow                                                             Once you took the side of any of the forces in the field, you were doomed.
rooted around the tree
The powerfl would take you over, the weak would wear you down. Any
and hunted in the
new alliance would lead to a new enemy, and as this cycle stirred up more
woods, and when night
conflict, other forces would be dragged in, untl you could no longer exti­
came she would bring
her young something                                                            cate yourself. Eventually you would collapse from exhaustion.
to eat.                                                                        Isabella steered her kingdom on the only course that would bring her
And the eagle and the
                                                                               safely through. She would not allow herself to lose her head through loy­
sow lived in neighborly
fashion. And a                                                                 alty to a duke or a king. Nor would she ty to stop the conflict that raged
grimalkin laid her                                                             around her-that would only drag her into it. And in any cae the conflict
plans to destroy the
was to her advantage. If the various parties were fightng to the deat, and
eaglets and the little
exhaustng themselves in the process, they were i no positon to gobble
sucking pigs. She went
to the eagle, and said:                                                        up Mantua. The source of Isabella's power was her clever ability to seem
" Eagle, you had better                                                        interested in the affars and interests of each side, while actually commit­
not fly very far away.
tng to no one but herself and her kingdom.
Beware of the sow; she
Once you step into a fight that is not of your own choosing, you lose all
is planning an evil
design. She is going to                                                                                                                                      initative. The combatants' interests become your interests; you become
undermine the roots of                                                         their tool. Lea                                                               to control yourself, to restain your natural tendency to
the tree. You see she is
take sides and join the fight. Be friendly and charming to each of the com­
rooting all the time."
batats, then step back as they collide. With every battle they grow weaker,
Then the grimalkin
went to the sow and                                                            while you grow stonger with every battle you avoid.
said: "Sow, you have
not a good neighbor.
Wen the snipe and the mussel struggle, the fisherman gets the benefit.
Last evening I heard
Ancient Chinese saying
the eagle saying to her
eaglets: 'My dear little
eaglets, I am going to
treat you to a nice little
KEYS TO POWER
pig. lust as soon as the
To   succeed in the game of power, you have to master your emotions. But
sow is gone, I will bring
you a little young                                                             even if you succeed in gaining such self-control, you can never contol the
sucking pig.' "                                                                temperamental dispositons of those around you. And this presents a great
From that time the
danger. Most people operate i a whirlpool of emotons, constantly react­
eagle ceased to jy out
ing, chuming up squabbles and conflicts. Your self-contol ad autonomy
after prey, and the sow
did not go any more                                                            w                                                                             only bother and infriate them. They will ty to draw you into the
into the forest. The                                                                                                                                         whirlpool, begging you to take sides in their endless battles, or to make
eaglets and the young
peace for tem. If you succumb to their emotonal enteates, little by little
pigs perished ofstarva­
you will find your mind and tme occupied by tkeir problems. Do not allow
tion, and grimalkin
                                                                               feasted on them.                                                              whatever compassion and pity you possess to suck you in. You ca never
                                                                               FABLES,                                                                       win in this game; the conflicts can only multply.
                                                                               LEO TOLSTOY,
                                                                                                                                                             On the other hand, you cannot completely stand aside, for that would
                                                                               1828-1910
152                                                                            LAW 20

cuse needless offense. To   play the game properly, you must seem inter­
ested in other people's problems, even sometmes appear to take their side.
THE PRICE OF EIYY
But while you mae outward gestres of support, you must maintain your
While a poor woman
inner energy and sanity by keeping your emotons disengaged. No matter
stood in the market­
how had people ty to puH you in, never let your interest in their                   a                                                                            airs
place selling cheeses, a
                                                                                    and petty squabbles go beyond the surface. Give them gifs, listen with a     cat came along and
sy                                                                                  pathetc look, even occasionaly play the charmer-but inwardly keep            carried off a cheese. A
dog saw the pilferer
bot the fiendly kings and the perfidious Borgias at arm's length. By refus­
and tried to take the
ing to commit and thus maintaining your autonomy you retain the inita­
cheese away from him.
tve:   Your   moves   stay   matters   of  your  own  choosing,   not   defensive   The cat stood up to the
reatons to the push-and-puH of those around you.                                    dog. So they pitched
into each other. The
Slowness to pick up your weapons can be a weapon itself, especially if
dog barked and
you let other people exhaust themselves fightng, then take advatage of
snapped; the cat spat
teir exhauston. In ancient China, the kingdom of Chin once invaded the              and scratched, but they
kingdom  of Hsing.  Hua,  the  ruler  of a nearby province,  thought  he            could bring the battle
to no decision.
should  rush to  Hsing's  defense,  but his adviser  counseled  hir  to  wait:
"Let's go to the fox and
"Hsing is not yet going to ruin," he sad, "ad Chin is not yet exhausted. If
have him referee the
ehin is not exhausted, [we] cannot become very influentia. Moreover, the            matter" the cat finally
suggested.
merit of supporting a state in danger is not as great as the virtue of reviving
"Agreed, " said the dog.
a rined one." The adviser's argument won the day, and as he had pre­
So they went to the fox.
dicted, Huan later had the glory both of rescuing Hsing from the brink of           The fox listened to their
destction and then of conquering an exhausted Chin. He stayed out of                arguments with a judi­
te fghting until the forces engaged in it had wor each other down, at               cious air.
                                                                                    "Foolish animals, " he
which point it was safe for hir to intervene.
                                                                                    chided them, "why
That is what holding back fom the fay allows you: time to positon                   carry on like that? If
yourself to take advantage of the situaton once one side stats to lose. You         both of you are willing,
1'11 divide the cheese in
can aso tke the game a step frther, by promising your support to both
two and you'lI both be
sides in a conflict while maneuvering so that the one to come out ahead in
satisfied. "
te stuggle is you. This was what Castruccio Castacani, ruler of te Italian          "Agreed, " said the cat
town of Lucca in the fourteenth century, did when he had designs on the             and the dog.
So the fox took out his
tw of Pistoia. A siege would have been expensive, costing both lives and
knife   and cut the cheese
money, but Castruccio knew that Pistoia contained two riya factons, the
in two, but, instead of
Bla                                                                                 s and the Whites, which hated one aother. He negotated wit the               cutting it lengthwise, he
                                                                                    Blacks, promising to  help  them against the  Whites; then,  without their   cut it in the width.
"My half is smallerl "
kowledge,  he  promised  the  Whites  he  would  help  them  against  the
protested the dog.
Blacks. And Castruccio kept his promises-he sent an army to a Blac­
The fox looked judi­
contolled  gate  to  the  city,  which  te  senties  of course  welcomed  in.       ciously through his
Meawhile another of his armies entered through a White-controHed gate.              spectacles at the dog's
share.
Te two armies united in the middle, occupied the town, kiHed the leaders
" You 're right, quite
ofbot factons, ended the interal war, and took Pistoia for Castruccio.
rightl" he decided.
Peserving your autonomy gives you options when people come to                       So he went and bit off
blows-you can play the mediator, broker the peace, while really securing            a piece of the cat's
share.
YOU own interests. You can pledge support to one side ad the other may
" That will make it
have to court you with a higher bid. ür, like Castruccio, you ca appear to
evenl" he said.
te both sides, then play the antagonists against each other.                        When the cat saw what
Ofentimes when a conflict breaks out, you are tempted to side with                  the fox did she began
                                                                                    to yowl:
te stronger party, or the one that offers you apparent advantages in an a-
                                                                                    LAW 20                                                                       153

"lust loo k '  My part '5                                                       lia                                                                            e. This is risky business. First, it is ofen difficult to fore see which side
smaller now!"
will prevail in the long run. But even if you guess right and ally YOUfseif
The fox aRain put on
with the stonger party, you may find YOUfself swallowed up and lost, or
his spectacles and
looked judieiously at                                                           conveniently forgotten, when they become victors. Side with the weaker,
the ca!'s share.                                                                on the other hand, and you are doomed. But play a waitng ga                    e and you
"RiRht YOIl are'" said
cannot lose.
the fox. "ll/st a
moment, and f'll make                                                           In France's July Revolution of 1830, after three days of riots, the states­
it right. "                                                                     ma Talleyrand, now elderly, sat by his Paris window, listening to the peal­
And he went and bit                                                             ing bells that signaled the riots were over. Tuming to an assistat, he sad,
off a piece from the
"A, the  bells!  We're  winning."  "Who's  'we,'  mon prince?" the  assistant
dog'5 chcese
asked.  Gesturing for the  man to  keep quiet, Talleyrand replied,  "Not a
This went on so long,
with the fox nihbling                                                           word! 1'1 tell you who we are tomorrow." He well knew that only fools
first at the dog's and
rush into a situaton-that by committng too quickly you lose your ma­
then at the ca!'s share,
neuverabilit. People also respect you less: Perhaps tomorrow, they think,
that he finally ate up
the whole cheese be(ore                                                         you will commit to another, different cause, since you gave YOUfself so eas­
their eyes.                                                                     ily to this one. Good fortune is a fickle god and will often pass from one
A TREASURY OE J E W I S H                                                       side to the other. Commit                                                      ent to one side deprives you of the advantage of
FOLKLOR :.,
tme ad the luxury of waiting. Let oters fall in love wit this group or
NATfIAN AlJSUßEL. ED..
1948                                                                            that; for YOUf part don't rush in, don't lose YOUf head.
Finally, tere ae occasions when it is wisest to drop al pretence of ap­
peaing supportve  and  instead to tumpet your independence and  self­
reliance. The aristocratic pose of independence is  particulaly important
for those who need to gain respect. George Washington recognized this in
his work to  establish  the young American  republic on firm  ground.  As
president, Washington avoided the temptaton of maing an alliance wit
France or England, despite the pressUfe on hir to do so. He wanted the
country to eam the world's respect through its independence. Although a
treaty with France might have helped in the short term, in the long run he
knew it would be  more effectve to establish the nation's autonomy. Eu­
rope would have to see the United States as an equal power.
Remember: You have only so much energy ad so much tme. Every
moment wasted on the affairs of others subtacts from YOUf stength. You
may be afrad that people will condemn you as heatless, but in the end,
maintaining YOUf independence and self-reliance will gain you more re­
spect and place you in a positon of power from which you can choose to
help others on YOUf own initiatve.
154                                                                             LAW 2 0

Image: A Thicket of Shrubs.
In the forest, one shrub
latches on to another,
entangling  its  neighbor
with its thorns, the thicket
slowly extending its impen­
etrable domain. Only what
keeps its distance and
stands apart can grow and
rise above the thicket.
Authority: Regard it as
more courageous not to
become  involved in an
engagement than to win
in battle, and where there
is already one interfering
fool, take care that there
shall not be two. (Baltasar
Gracian,                                                                       1601-1658)
REVERSAL
Both parts of this law will tur aganst you if you take it too far. The game
proposed here is delicate and difficult. If you play too many partes against
one aother, they will see through the maneuver and will gang up on you.
If you keep YOUf growing number of suitors waiting too long, you will in­
spire not desire but distust. People will start to lose interest. Eventually
you may find it worthwhile to commit to one side                               if only for appearances'
sae, to prove you are capable of attachment.
Even then, however, the key will he to maintain your inner indepen­
denee-to keep yourself from getting emotonally involved. Peserve the
unspoken option of being ahle to leave at any moment and reclaim YOUf
feedom i the side you are allied with stats to collapse. The fiends you
made while you were being eourted will gve you plenty of plaees to go
onee you jump ship.
LAW 20                                                                         155

LAW
21
P LAY A SU C KER TO CATC R
A SUC KER-SEEM DUMB ER
TRAN YOUR MARK
JUDGMENT
No one likes feeling stupider than the next person. The
trick, then, is to make your victims feel smart-and not
just smart, but smarter than you are. Once convinced of
this, the will never suspect that you may have ulteror
motives.
156

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In te winter of 1872, the U.S. financier Asbury Harpending was visitng
Now. there is nothing
Lndon when he received a cable: A diamond mine had been discovered
of whieh a man is
i te American West. The cable came from a reliable source-William             prouder than of intel­
Rston, owner of the Bank of Caiforia-but Harpending nevertheless              leetual ability, for it is
                                                                              this that gives hir his
tok it as a practical joke, probably inspired by the recent discovery of
                                                                              eommanding plaee in
huge diamond mines in South Afica. True, when reports had first come in       the animal warld. It is
of gold being discovered in the wester United States, everyone had been       an exeeedingly rash
septcal, and those had tured out to be true. But a diamond mine in the        thing to let anyone see
                                                                              that you are deeidedly
West! Harpending showed the cable to his fellow financier Baron Rot­
                                                                              superior to hirn in this
scild (one of the richest men in te world), saying it must be a joke. The     respeet, and to let other
baon, however, replied, "Don't be too sure about that. America is a very      people see it (o. . .
Henee, while rank and
lrge country. It has                                                          fshed the world with many surprises already. Per­
riehes may always
haps it has others in store." Hapending promptly took te first ship back
reckon upon deferen­
t te States.                                                                  tial treatment in soeiery,
When Harpending reached Sa Fracisco, tere was an excitement in                that is something whieh
intelleetual ability can
te a recaing the Gold Rush days of the late 1840s. Two crusty prospec­
never expeet: To   be
tors naed Philip Amold and John Slack had been the ones to find the di­
ignored is the greatest
aond                                                                          re. They had not divulged its locaton, i Wyoming, but had led                 favour shown to it; ami
                                                                              a highly respected mining expert to it several weeks bac, taking a circular   ifpeople notiee it at all,
it is beeause they
route so he could not guess his whereabouts. Once tere, te expert had
regard it as a piece of
watched as te miners dug up diamonds. Bac in San Francisco te expert
impertinence, or else as
b ten the gems to various jewelers, one of whom had estimated their           something to whieh its
wor at $ 1.5 million.                                                         possessor has no legiti­
mate right, ami upon
Haending and Ralston now asked Amold and Slac to accompany
whieh he dares to pride
tem back to New York, where the jeweler Charles Tiffany would verif
hirnself;  and in rctalia­
te original estmates. The prospectors responded uneasily-they smelled         tion ami revenge for
a tap: How could tey trust these city slickers? What if Tiffay and the fi­    his conduet, people
secretly try and humili­
naciers managed to steal the whole mine out fom uder them? Ralston
ate hir in some other
ted to alay their fears by giving them $ 100,000 and placing aother
                                                                              way; and if they waU                                                          10
$30,000 i escrow for them. If the dea went through, they would be paid        da Ihis, it is only for a
a aditiona $300,000. The miners agreed.                                       fitting opportunity. A
man may be as humhle
The little group traveled to New York, where a meetng was held at the
as possible in his
mansion of Samuel L. Barlow. The cream of te city's aristocracy was in at­
demeanollr, and yet
tdance-Genera George Brinton McClellan, commander of the Union                hardly ever get people
forces in the Civil War; General Benjamin Butler; Horace Greeley, editor      to overlook his crime
in standing intelleetu­
of te newspaper the New Yrk Tibune; Harpending; Ralston; ad Tiffay.
al/y above them. In Ihe
Only Slack ad Amold were missing-as tourists in the city, tey had de­
Garden of Roses, Sadi
cided to go sight-seeing.                                                     makes the remark:
When Tiffay announced that te gems were real ad worth a fortune,              'TOl shou/d know that
                                                                              foolish people are a
te finaciers could barely contol teir excitement. They wired Roth­
                                                                              hundredfold m'Jrt
scild and other tycoons to tell tem about te diamond mine ad invitng          averse 10 meeting Ihe
tem to shae in the investent. A te same tme, tey aso told te                  wise than the wise
are indisposed for
prospectors that they wanted one more test: They insisted that a mining ex­
the eompany of
pr of teir choosing accompay Slack ad Amold to te site to verif its
the foolish. "
weat. The prospectors reluctantly agreed. In the meantme, tey sad,
LAW 2 1                                                                       157

On Ihe olher hand. il is                                                          they had to retur to San Francisco. The jewels that Tiffany had examined
a real recomnlendaliof1
tey left wit Harpending for safekeeping.
10 be stupid. fiJr just as
Several weeks later, a man named Louis Jain, the best mining expert
warmlh is agreeable to
the body. so it does the                                                          in the county, met te prospectors in San Francisco. Jain was a bor
miml good 10 feel ils                                                             skeptc who wa determined to make sure that the mine was not a faud.
superiority; ant a nlan
Accompanying Janin were Harpending, and  several other interested fi­
will seek companv
nanciers. A with the previous expert, the prospectors led the team through
likely 10 give him Ihis
feeling, as inslinetively                                                         a complex series of cayons, completely confsing them as to teir where­
as he will approach the                                                           abouts. Arriving at te site, the financiers watched in amazement as Jain
fireplace or walk in Ihe
dug te area up, leveling anthills, turing over boulders, and finding emer­
sun if he wants 10 gel
alds, rubies, sapphires, ad most of all diamonds. The dig lasted eight days,
warnz. Bul Ihis means
Ihal he will be disliked                                                          ad by the end, Janin was convinced: He told the investors tat they now
on aceol/nl of his supe­
possessed the richest field in mining history.  "With a hundred men and
riority; ami if a man is
proper machinery," he told tem, "1 would guarantee to send out one mil­
to be liked. he m l/st
really be inferior in                                                             lion dollars in diamonds every thirty days."
poinl of intellect.                                                               Returing to San Francisco a few days later, Ralston, Hapending, and
A RT H l J R                                                                      compay acted fast to form a $ 10 million corporaton of private investors.
SClIOPENIIAlIER,
17XS-ltIO                                                                         First, however, they had to get rid ofAold and Slac. That meant hiding
their  excitement-they  certainly  did  not  want  to  reveal  te  field's  rea
vaue. So they played possum. Who knows if Janin is right, they told the
prospectors, the mine may not be as rich as we think. This just made te
prospectrs agry. Trying a different tactc, the financiers tld the two men
that if they insisted on having shares in the mine, they would end up being
fleeced by the unscrupulous tycoons and investors who would run the cor­
poraton; better, they said, to tae the $700,000 already offered-an enor­
mous  sum at the  tme-and  put their greed  aside. This the prospectors
seemed to understand, and they finally agreed to take the money, in retur
signing the rights to te site over to the financiers, ad leaving maps to it.
News of the mine spread like wildfire. Prospectors farmed out across
Wyoming. Meanwhile Harpending and group bega spending the millions
they had collected from their investors, buying equipment, hiring the best
men in the business, and fmishing luxurious offices in New York and San
Fracisco.
A few weeks later, on their first trip back to the site, tey lea                  ed te
hard truth: Not a single diamond or ruby was to be found. It was all a fake.
They were ruined. Harpending had unwittngly lured te ricest men in
the world into te biggest sca                                                     of te century.
Interpretation
Amold and Slack pulled off their stupendous con not by using a fae engi­
neer or bribing Tiffay: All of the experts had been real. All of them hon­
estly believed in the existence of the mine and in the value of the gems.
What had fooled them all was nothing else tha Amold and Slack tem­
selves. The two men seemed to be such rubes, such hayseeds, so naive, tha
no one for a instant had believed tem capable of an audacious scam.
The prospectors had simply observed te law of appeaing more stupid
than the mark-the deceiver's First Commadment.
158                                                                               LAW 2 1

Te logistcs of the con were quite simple. Monts before Amold and
Slak anounced the "discovery" of the diamond mine, they taveled to
Euope, where they purchased some real gems for aound $ 12,000 (part of
te money they  had  saved  fom  their  days  as  gold  miners) .  They  then
sated  te  "mine"  with  these  gems,  which  te  first expert dug up  and
brought to San Francisco. The jewelers who had apprased these stones, in­
cludng Tiffany hirself, had gotten caught up in the fever ad had grossly
overestimated their value. Then Ralston gave the prospectors $ 100,000 as
security, and immediately afer teir trip to New York they simply went to
Asterdam, where they bought sacs of uncut gems, before retuming to
Sa Francisco.  The second time they sated the mine, tere were many
more jewels to be found.
The  effectiveness of the  schere, however, rested not on tricks like
tese but on the fact that Amold and Slack played their parts to perfecton.
On teir tip to New York, where they mingled wit                                 rllionaires and t­
coons, they played up their clodhopper image, wearing pants and coats a
size or two too small and acting incredulous at everything they saw in the
big city. No one believed that tese country simpletons could possibly be
conning the most devious, unscrupulous financiers of the time. And once
Ha                                                                              ending, Raston, and even Rothschild accepted the mine's existence,
ayone who doubted it was questoning the intelligence of the world's most
successfl businessmen.
In the end, Harpending's reputaton was ruined and he never recov­
ered; Rothschild lea                                                            ed bis lesson and never fell for anoter con; Slac
took his money and disappeared fom view, never to be found. Amold
simply went hore to Kentucky. After all, his sae of his mining rights had
been legitmate; the buyers had taen the best advice, and if the mine had
r                                                                               out of diamonds, that was their problem.  Amold used the money to
geatly enlarge his farm and open up a bak of his OW
KEYS TO P OWER
Te feeling that someone else is more intelligent than we are is almost in­
tlerable. We    usually try to justf it in different ways : "He only has book
kowledge, whereas I have rea knowledge." "Her paents paid for her to
get  a good education. If my parents had had as much money, if I had been
a privileged                                                                    " "He's not as smart as he thinks." Last but not least: "She
may  know her narrow litte field better tha I do, but beyond that she's re­
aly not smart at all. Even Einstein was a boob outside physics."
Given how important the idea of intelligence is to most people's van­
it, it is critical never inadvertently to insult or impugn a person's brain
power. That is a unforgivable sin. But if you ca make this iron rule work
for you, it opens up all sorts of avenues of decepton. Subliminally reassure
people that they are more intelligent than you are, or even that you are a
bit of a moron, and you can                                                     r                                                                    rings aound them. The feeling of intellec­
ta superiorit you give tem                                                      w                                                                    disarm their suspicion-muscles.
In 1865 the Pussian councillor Otto von Bismarck wanted Austria to
LAW 2 1                                                                         159

sign a certain teaty. The teaty was totally in the interests of Pussia and
against the interests of Austia, and Bismarck would have to stategize to
get the Austrias to agree to it. But the Austria negotiator, Count BIome,
was a avid cardplayer. His partcula game was quinze, and he ofen said
that he could judge a man's character by the way he played quinze. Bis­
marck knew of this saying of BIome's.
The night before the negotatons were to begin, Bismarc innocenty
engaged BIome in a game of quinze. The Pussian would later write, "That
was the very  last tme l ever played  quinze. I played so recklessly that
everyone was astonished. I lost several thousand talers [the currency of the
tme], but I succeeded in fooling [BIome], for he believed me to be more
venturesome tha l                                                                  a                                                  and I gave way." Besides appearing reckless, Bis­
marck also played the witless fool, saying ridiculous things and bumbling
about with a surplus of nervous energy.
All this made BIome feel he had gathered valuable information. He
knew that Bismarck was aggressive-the Pussian already had that reputa­
ton, and the way he played had confirmed it. And aggressive men, BIome
knew, can be foolish '.d rash. Accordingly, when the time came to sig
the teaty, BIome thought he had the advantage. A heedless fool like Bis­
marck, he thought, is incapable of cold-blooded calculaton and deception,
so he only glanced at the teaty before signing it-he failed to read the fine
print. As soon as the ink was dry, a joyous Bismac exelamed in his face,
"WeIl, I could never have believed that I should find an Austian diplomat
willing to sign that document!"
The  Chinese  have  a phrase,  "Masquerading  as  a swine to kl the
tiger." This refers  to  an  ancient huntng technique  in  which the hunter
elothes himself in the hide and snout of a pig, and mimics its gruntng. The
mighty tger thinks a pig is coming his way, and lets it get elose, savoring
the prospect of an easy meal. But it is the hunter who has the last laugh.
Masquerading as a swine works wonders on those who, like tgers, are
arogant and overconfident: The easier they think it is to prey on you, the
more easily you ca tur the tables. This tric is aso usefl if you ae ambi­
tious yet find yourself low in the hierarchy: Appearing less intelligent than
you are, even a bit of a fool, is the perfect disguise. Look like a harmless pig
and no one will believe you habor dangerous ambitons. They may even
promote you since you seem so likable, and subservient. Claudius before
he became emperor of Rome, and the prince of France who later became
Louis XIII, used this tactc when those above them suspected they might
have designs on the trone. By playing the fool as young men, they were
left alone. When the tme came for them to strike, and to act with vigor and
decisiveness, they caught everyone off-guard.
Intelligence is the obvious quality to downplay, but why stop there?
Taste  and  sophistcation rank elose  to  intelligence  on  the vanity scaej
make people feel they are more sophisticated than you are and their guard
will come down. As                                                                 Aold ad Slac knew, an air of complete naivete ca
work wonders. Those fancy financiers were laughing at them behind their
160                                                                                LAW 21

baks, but who laughed loudest in the end? In general, then, always make
people believe they are smater and more sophistcated than you are. They
wl keep you around because you make them feel beUer about themselves,
ad te longer you are around, the more opportunities you will have to de­
ceive them.
I m age:
The Opossum. In playing
dead, the opossum plays stupid.
Many a predator has therefore left i t
alone. Who could believe that such an
ugly,  unintelligent, nervous little  creature
could  be  capable  of  such  deception?
Authority: Know how to make use o f  stupidity: The wisest man
plays this card at times. There are occasions when the highest
wisdom consists in appearing not to know-you must not be igno­
rant but capable of playing it. It is not much good being wise
among fools and sane among lunatics. He who poses as a fool is not
a fooI. The best way to be weIl received by all is to dothe YOUfself
in the skin of the dumbest of brutes. (Baltasar Graciän, 1601- 1658)
REVERSAL
To  reveal the true nature of yoUf intelligence rarely pays; you should get in
te habit of downplaying it at all times. If people inadvertently leam the
tt-that you are actually much smarter than you look-they will admire
you more for being discreet tha for making YOUf brilliance show. At the
st                                                                               of your dimb to the top, of course, you cannot play too stupid: You
may want to let YOUf bosses know, in a subtle way, that you ae smarter
ta te competiton around you. As you dimb the ladder, however, you
should to some degree ty to dampen YOUf brilliace.
There is, however, one situaton where it pays to do the opposite
when you can cover up a decepton with a show of intelligence. In matters
of smats as in most things, appearances are what count. If you seem to
have authority and knowledge, people will believe what you say. This can
be very useful in getting you out of a scrape.
The art dealer Joseph Duveen was once attending a soiree at the New
York hore of a tycoon to whom he had recently sold a Dürer painting for
LAW 2 1                                                                          161

a high price. Among the guests was a young French                                 a                      critic who seemed
extemely knowledgeable ad confident. Wating to impress this man, the
tycoon's daughter showed him the Dürer, which had  not yet been hung.
The critic studied it for a tme, then finaly said, "You know, I don't think
this Dürer is right." He followed the young woman as she hurried to tell
her father what he had said, and listened as the magnate, deeply unsettled,
tumed to Duveen for reassurance. Duveen just laughed. "How very amus­
ing," he said. "Do you realize, young man, that at least twenty other             a                      ex­
perts  here  and  in  Europe  have  been  taken  in  too,  and have  said  that
painting isn't genuine? And now you've made the sa                                e mistake." His con­
fident tone  and air of authority intmidated the  Frenchman,  who  apolo­
gized for his mistake.
Duveen knew that the  art maket was  flooded with fakes,  and that .
many paintings had been falsely ascribed to old masters. He tied his best
to distnguish the real from the fake, but in his zeal to seIl he ofen over­
played a work's authentcity. What mattered to him was that the buyer be­
lieved   he  had  bought  a  Dürer,   and  that   Duveen   himself  convinced
everyone of his "expertess" through his air of irreproacable authority.
Thus, it is important to be able to play the professor when necessary and
never impose such an atttude for its own sake.
162                                                                               LAW 2 1

LAW
22
USE THE SURRENDER
TACTI C :  TRANSF ORM
WEAKNESS INTO P OWER
JUDGMENT
lWen you are weaker neverfightJor honor' sake; choose
surrender instead. Surrender gives you time to recover
time to torent and irtate your conqueror time to wait
Jor his power to wane. Do not give him the satisJaction oJ
fighting and deJeating you-surrender firt. By   turing
the other cheek you inJuriate and unsettle him. Make
surender a tool oJ power.
163

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
The island of Melos is strategically situated in the heart of the Mediter­
'1I1F                                                                           ( ' 1 1 1'>.'1"1 'I                                                             \'1>
ranean. In classical tmes, the city of Athens dominated the sea and coasta
TIIE I'IC THIT
areas around Greece, but Sparta, in the Peloponnese, had been Melos's
A m a n  w h o  had
climbed upun a certain                                                          original colonizer. During the Peloponnesian War, then, the Melians re­
fig tree, was bending                                                           fsed to ally themselves with Athens and remained loyal to Mother Sparta.
the buughs toward hir                                                           In 416 B.C. the Athenians sent an expedition against Melos. Before launch­
and plucking the ripe
ing an all-out attack, however, they dispatched a delegaton to persuade the
fruit, whieh he then
Melians to surrender and become an ally rather than suffer devastation and
put into his mouth to
destroy ami gnaw                                                                defeat.
with his hard teeth The
"You know as weIl as we do," the delegates said, "that the standard of
ehestnut, seeing this,
justce depends on the equality of power to compel, and that in fact the
tossed its long branches
strong do what they have the power to do and the weak accept what they
and with tU/nulluous
rustle exclaimed: "Olz                                                          have to accept." When the Melians responded that this denied the noton
Fig ' How mueh less
of fair play, the Athenians said that those in power determined what was
pruteeted by nature you
fair ad what was not. The Melians argued that this authority belonged to
are than I. See how my
sweet ofj pring are set                                                         the gods, not to mortals. "Our opinion of the gods and our knowledge of
in cluse array; first                                                           men," replied a member of the Athenian delegation, "lead us to conclude
clothed in soft wrap­
that it is a general and necessary law of nature to rule whatever one can."
pers over which is the
The Melians would not budge. Sparta, they insisted, would come to
hard but suftly lined
husk And not content                                                            their defense. The Athenians countered that the Spatans were a conserva­
with this much care,                                                            tive, practical people, and would not help Melos because they had nothing
nature Iws also given
to gain and a lot to lose by doing so.
us these sharp and
Finally the Melians began to talk ofhonor and the principle of resisting
close-set spines, su that
the hand ofman                                                                  brute force. "Do not be led astray by a false sense of honor," said the Athe­
cannot hurt us, "                                                               nians. "Honor often brings men to ruin when they are faced with an obvi­
Then the fig tree began
ous danger that somehow affects their pride. There is nothing disgracefl in
to laugh, and after the
giving way to the greatest city in Hellas when she is offering you such rea­
laughter it said: "You
know weil that man is                                                           sonable terms." The debate ended. The Melians discussed the issue among
of such ingenuity that                                                          themselves, and decided to trust in the ad of the Spartans, the will of the
he will bereave even
gods, and the rightness of their cause. They politely declined the Athenians'
you ofyour chi/dren,
offer.
But in your case he will
do it by means ofrods                                                           A few days later the Athenians invaded Melos. The Melians fought
and stones; and when                                                            nobly, even without the Spartas, who did not come to their rescue. It took
they are felled he will
several attempts before the Athenians could surround and besiege their
trample them with his
main city, but the Melians finally surrendered. The Athenians wasted no
feet ur hit them with
stunes, so that your                                                            time-they put to death all the men of military age that they could captre,
offspring will emerge                                                           they sold the women and children as slaves, and they repopulated the is­
frum their armur
land with their own colonists. Only a handfl of Melians survived.
erushed ami maimed;
while 1 am touched
carefully by his hand,',                                                        Interpretation
and neva, like yuu,                                                             The Athenians were one of the most eminently practical people in history,
with roughness, "
and they made the most practcal argument they could with the Melians:
LEONARDO DA VINCI,
1 452- 1 5 19                                                                   When you are weaker, there is nothing to be gained by fighting a useless
fight. No one comes to help the wea-by doing so they would only put
themselves in jeopady. The weak are alone and must submit. Fighting
16      LAW 2 2

gves you nothing to gain but martyrdom, and in the process a lot of people
who do not believe in your cause will die.
Voltaire was living in
Weakness is no sin, and ca even become a strength if you leam how
exile in London at a
t play it right. Had the Melians surrendered in the first place, they would     time when anti-French
have been able to sabotage the Athenians in subtle ways, or might have          sentiment was at
its highest. One day
gotten what tey could have out of the alliance and then left it when the
walking through the
Atenians themselves were weakened, as in fact happened several years
streets, hefound himself
later. Fortunes change and the mighty are ofen brought down. Surrender          surrounded by an
conceals great power: Lulling the enemy into complacency, it gives you          angry crowd. "Hang
him. Hang the French­
tme to recoup, time to undermine, time for revenge. Never sacrifice that
man," they yelled.
tme in exchange for honor in a battle that you cannot win.
Voltaire calmly
addressed the mob with
the fol!owing words:
Weak people never give way when the ought to.
"Men of England! You
Cardinal de Retz, 1 613-1 6 79
wish to kill me because
I am a Frenchman. A m
I not punished enough
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW                                                           in not being born an
                                                                                Englishman ? "  The
Sametime in the 1920s the German writer BertoIt Brecht became a convert
                                                                                crowd cheered his
to te cause of Communism. From then on his plays, essays, and poems re­         Ihoughtful words, and
flected his revolutionary fervor, and he generally tried to make his ideolog­   escorted him safely
back 10 his lodgings.
ical statements  as  clear as  possible. When Hitler came to power in
THE LITTLE, BROWN
Gerany, Brecht and his Communist colleagues became marked men. He
BOOK OF ANECDOTES,
had many friends in the United States-Americans who sympathized with            CLIFTON FADIMAN, ED.,
1985
his beliefs, as well as fellow German intellectuals who had fled Hiter. In
1941, accordingly, Brecht emigrated to the United States, and chose to set­
te in Los Angeles, where he hoped to make a living in the film business.
Over the next few years Brecht wrote screenplays with a pointedly an­
tcapitalist slant. He had little success in Hollywood, so in 1947, the war
having ended, he decided to retur to Europe. That same year, however,
te U.S. Congress's House Un-American Activities Committee began its
investigaton into supposed Communist infiltraton in Hollywood. It began
t gater information on Brecht, who had so openly espoused Marxism,
ad on September 19, 1947, only a mont before he had planned to leave
te United States, he received a subpoena to appear before the committee.
In addition to Brecht, a number of oter writers, producers, and directors
were summoned to appear as well, and this group came to be known as the
Hollywood 19.
Before going to Washington, the Hollywood 19 met to decide on a plan
of action. Their approach would be confontatonal. Instead of answering
questions about their membership, or lack of it, in the Communist Party,
tey would read prepared statements tat would callenge the authority of
te committee and argue that its activites were unconstitutional. Even if
tis strategy meant imprisonment, it would gain publicity for their cause.
Brecht disagreed. What good was it, he asked, to play the martyr and
gan a little public sympathy if in the process they lost the ability to stage
teir plays ad sell their scripts for years to come? He feIt certain they were
LAW 22                                                                          165

all more intelligent tha te members o f  the committee. Why lower them­
selves to the level of their opponents by arguing with them? Why not out­
fox the committee by appearing to surrender to it wbile subtly mocing it?
The Hollywood 19 listened to Brecht politely, but decided to stck to teir
plan, leaving Brecht to go bis own way.
The  committee finaly summoned Brecht on  October 30. They ex­
pected hir to do what others among the Hollywood 19 who had testified
before hir had done: Argue, refse to  answer  questons,  callenge  the
committee's right to hold its heaing, even yell and hurI insults. Much to
their surprise, however, Brecht was the very picture of congeniality.  He
wore a suit (something he rarely did), smoked a cigar (he had heard that
the committee charman was a passionate ciga smoker),  answered  their
questons politely, ad generally deferred to their authority.
Unlike the other witesses, Brecht answered te queston of whether
he belonged  to  the  Communist Party:  He  was  not a member,  he  said,
which happened to be the truth. One committee member asked hir, "Is it
tue you have written a number of revolutonary plays?" Brecht had writ­
ten  many  plays  with  overt  Communist messages, but he responded,  "I
have written a number of poems and songs and plays in the fight against
Hitler and, of course, they can be considered, therefore, as revolutonary
because I, of course, was for the overthrow of that goverment." This state­
ment went unchallenged.
Brecht's English was more than adequate, but he used an interpreter
throughout his testmony, a tactc that alowed hir to play subtle games
with language. When committee members found Communist leaings in
lines from English editons of his poems, he would repeat the lines in Ger­
ma for the interpreter, who would then retanslate them; and somehow
they would come out innocuous. At one point a committee member read
one of Brecht's revolutonay poems out loud in English, and asked hir if
he had written it. "No," he responded, "I wrote a German poem, wbich is
very different fom this. "  The author's elusive answers baffled the commit­
tee members, but his politeness and the way he yielded to their authority
mae it impossible for them to get angry with hir.
Afer only an hour of questoning, the committee members had had
enough. "Thank you very much," said the chairma, "You are a good ex­
ample to the [other] witnesses." Not only did they fee hir, they offered to
help hir if he had any trouble with immigraton officials who might detain
hir for their own reasons. The following day, Brecht left the United States,
never to retur.
Interpretation
The Hollywood 19's confontatonal approach won them a lot of sympa­
thy, and yeas later tey gined a kind of vindicaton in public opinion. But
they were also blacklisted,  and lost valuable years of profitable working
time.  Brecht,  on the  other hand,  expressed his  disgust at the committee
more indirectly. It was not that he changed his beliefs or compromised his
vaues; instead, during his short testimony, he kept the upper hand by ap-
166                                                                            LAW 22

peaing to yield while al the tme running cireles around the committee
wth vague responses, outright lies that went uncallenged because they
were wrapped in enigmas, ad word games. In the end he kept the fee­
dom to continue his revolutionary writing (as opposed to suffering impris­
onment or detainment in the United States), even while subtly mocing the
committee and its authority with his pseudo-obedience.
Keep in mind the following: People tying to make a show of their au­
tority are easily deceived by the surrender tactic. Your outward sign of
submission makes them feel important;  satsfied  that  you  respect them,
tey become easier targets for a later counterattac, or for the kind of indi­
rect ridicule used by Brecht. Measuring your power over time, never sacri­
fice long-term maneuverabilit for the short-lived glories of martyrdom.
Wen the great lord passes, the wise peasant bows deely and silntly Jarts.
Ethiopian proverb
KEYS TO POWER
What gets us into touble in the realm of power is often our own overreac­
ton to  the  moves  of our  enemies  and rivals. That overreacton creates
problems we would have avoided had we been more reasonable. It also
has an endless rebound effect, for the enemy then overreacts as well, muc
a the Athenians did to the Melians. It is always our first instnct to react, to
meet aggression with  some  other kind of aggression. But the next time
someone pushes you and you find yourself starting to react, ty tis: Do not
resist or fight back, but yield, tur the oter cheek, bend. You will find that
this ofen neutalizes their behavior-they expected, even wanted you to
react with force and so tey are caught off-guad and confounded by your
lack of resistance. By yielding, you in fact contol the situaton, because
your surrender is part of a larger plan to lull them into believing they have
defeated you.
This is the essence of the surrender tactic: Inwardly you stay fm, but
outwardly you bend. Deprived of a reason to get angry, your opponents
will ofen be bewildered instead. And tey are unlikely to react with more
violence, which would demand a reaction from you. Instead you are al­
lowed the time  and space to plot the countermoves that will bring them
down. In the battle of the intelligent against the brutal and the aggressive,
te  surrender tactic is the supreme weapon. It does require self-control:
Those  who  genuinely  surrender  give  up  their  freedom,  and  may  be
crushed by the humiliation of their defeat. You have to remember that you
only appear to surrender, like the animal that plays dead to save its hide.
We  have seen that it can be better to surrender than to fight; faced with
a more powerful opponent and a sure defeat, it is ofen also better to sur­
render than to run away. Running away may save you for the tme being,
but the aggressor will eventualy catch up with you.  If you surrender in­
stead, you have an opportunity to coil around your enemy and strike with
your fangs fom elose up.
LAW 22                                                                            167

In 473 B.C., in ancient China, King Goujian of Yue suffered a horrible
defeat from the mler of Wu in the battle of Fujiao.                              Gujian wated to flee,
but he had an adviser who told hir to surrender and to place hirself in the
service of the mler ofWu, from which position he could study the man and
plot his revenge. Deciding to follow this advice, Goujia gave the mler all
of his riches, ad went to work in his conqueror's stables as the lowest ser­
vat. For three years he humbled himself before the mler, who then, finally
satisfied of his  loyalty,  allowed hir to ret                                   hore. Inwadly, however,
Goujian had spent those three years gathering information and plottng re­
venge. When a terrible drought stuck Wu, and the kingdom was weak­
ened by inner turmoil, he raised a army, invaded, and won with ease.
That is the power behind surrender: It gives you the tme ad the flexibility
to plot a devastating counterblow. Had Goujian mn away, he would have
lost this chance.
Wen foreign tade began to threaten Japanese independence in the
mid-nineteenth century, the Japanese debated how to defeat the foreign­
ers. One minister, Hota Masayoshi, wrote a memorandum in 1857 that in­
fluenced Japanese policy for years to come: "I am therefore convinced that
our policy should be to condude friendly alliances, to send ships to foreign
counties everywhere and conduct trade, to copy the foreigners where they
ae at their best and so repair our own shortcomings, to foster our national
stength and complete our arma                                                    ents, and so gadualy subject the foreign­
ers to our influence ut in the end a the counties of the world know the
blessings   of  perfect   tanquillity   and   our   hegemony  is   acnowledged
throughout the globe." This is a brilliant application of the Law: Use sur­
render to gain  access to your enemy.  La                                        his ways, insinuate yourself
with hir slowly, outwardly conform to his customs, but inwardly maintain
your own culture. Eventually you will emerge victorious, for while he con­
siders you weak and inferior, and takes no precautons against you, you are
using the tme to catch up and surpass him. This sof, permeable form of in­
vaion is often the best, for the enemy has nothing to react against, prepare
for, or resist. And had Japan resisted Wester influence by force, it might
well have suffered a devastating invasion that would have permanently al­
tered its culture .
Surrender can aso offer a way of mocking your enemies, of turing
their power against them, as it did for Brecht. Milan Kundera's novel Te
Joke, based on the author's experiences in a penal camp in Czecoslovakia,
tells the  story of how the  prison guards orgaized a relay race, guards
against prisoners. For the guards this was a chance to show off their physi­
cal  superiority.  The prisoners knew they were expected to lose,  so they
went  out  of their  way  to   oblige-miming  exaggerated   exertion  while
barely moving, mnning a few yards and collapsing, limping, jogging ever
so slowly while the guards raced ahead at fll speed. Both by joining the
race  and by losing it,  they had  obliged the guards obediently; but their
"overobedience" had mocked the event to the point of mining it. Overobe­
dience-surrender-was here a way to  demonstrate  superiority in a re­
verse manner. Resistance would have engaged the prisoners in the cyde of
168                                                                              LAW 22

volence, lowering them to the guards' level. Overobeing the guards, how­
ever, made them ridiculous, yet they could not rightly punish the prison­
ers, who had only done what they asked.
Power is always in flux-since the game is by nature fluid, and an aena
of constant struggle, those with power almost always find themselves even­
tally on the downwad swing. If you find yourself temporaily weaened,
te surrender tactic is perfect for raisingyourself up again-it disguises your
abiton; it teaches you patence and self-control, key skills i the game;
ad it puts you in the best possible positon for taking advantage of your op­
pressor's sudden slide. If you run away or fight back, in te long run you
canot win. If you surrender, you will almost always emerge victorious.
Image : An Oak
Tree. The oak
that resists the
wind  loses  its
branches one
by  one,  and
with  nothing
left  to protect
it, the trunk fi­
nally  snaps.
The   oak   that
bends lives long-
er, its trunk grow-
ing   wider,   its   roots
deeper and more tenacious.
Authority: Ye    have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye
ad a tooth for a tooth: But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to hir the other
also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat,
let them have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to
go a mile, go with hir twain.                                                   (Jesus Christ, in Matthew 5 :38-41)
LAW 22                                                                          169

REVERSAL
The point of surrendering is to save your hide for a later date when you
can reassert yourself. It is precisely to avoid matyrdom tat one surren­
ders, but there are tmes when the enemy will not relent, ad martyrdom
seems the only way out. Furthermore, if you are willing to die, others may
gain power and inspiration fom your example.
Yet martyrdom, surrender's reversal, is a messy, inexact tactic, and is
as violent as te aggression it combats. For every famous martyr tere are
thousads more who have inspired neither a religion nor a rebellion, so
that i matyrdom does sometimes grant a certn power, it does so unpre­
dictably. More important, you will not be around to enjoy that power, suc
as it iso And tere is finaly something selfish ad arrogant about martrs,
as if they feit their followers were less important than their own glory.
When power deserts you, it is best to ignore this Law's reversal. Leave
martyrdom  alone:  The penduum will swing back your way eventually,
and you should stay alive to see it.
1 70                                                                         LAW 22

LAW
23
CONCENTRATE
YOUR FORCES
JUDGMENT
Conserve your forces  and energies by keeping them
concentrated at their strngest point. You gain more by
finding a rich mine and mining it deeper, than by flit­
tingfrom one shallow mine to another-intensity deeats
extensity every time. lVen lookingfor sources opower to
elevate you, find the one ke patron, thefat cow who wil
give you milkfor a long time to come.
1 71

TRAN S G RE S S I O N  OF T H E  LAW
In China in the early sixth century B.C., the kingdom of Wu   began a war
TIII: COOSE A:D
with the neigboring northem provinces of the Middle Kingdom. Wu was
TIIE 1I0HSE
a growing power, but it lacked the great history and civilization of the Mid­
A goose who was
dIe Kingdom, for centuries the center of Chinese culture. By defeating the
plucking grass upon a
common thought                                                                     Middle Kingdom, the king ofWu would instantly raise his status.
herself affronted by a                                                             The war began with great fanfare and several victories, but it soon
horse who fed near her;
bogged down. A victory on one front would leave the Wu   armies vulnera­
and, in hissing accents,
ble on another. The king's chief minister and adviser, Wu Tzu-hsiu, wamed
thus addressed him: "I
am certainly a more                                                                hir that the barbarous state of Yueh, to the south, was beginning to notice
noble and perfeet                                                                  the kingdom of Wu's problems and had designs to invade. The king only
animal than you, for
laughed at such worries-one more big victory and the great Middle King­
the whole range and
dom would be his.
extent of your faculties
is confined to one                                                                 In the year 490, Wu Tzu-hsiu sent his son away to safety in the king­
element. 1 can walk                                                                dom of Ch'i. In doing so he sent the king a signal that he disapptoved of
upon the ground as
                                                                                   the war, and that he believed the king's selfish ambition was leading Wu to
weil as you; 1 have,
besides, wings, with                                                               ruin. The king, sensing betrayal, lashed out at his minister, accusing hir of
which 1 can raise                                                                  a lack of loyalty and, in a fit of anger, ordered hir to kill hirself. Wu Tzu­
myself in the air; and
hsiu obeyed his king, but before he plunged the knife into his chest, he
when 1 please, 1 can
cried, "Tear out my eyes, oh King, and f them on the gate of Wu, so that I
sport on ponds and
lake;; and ref' sh                                                                 may see the triumphant entry of Yueh."
myself in the ,  ?ol                                                               As Wu  Tzu-hsiu had predicted, within a few years a Yueh army passed
waters. 1 enjoy the
beneath the gate of Wu. As the barbarians surrounded the palace, the king
different powers of a
remembered his minister's last words-and feit the dead man's disembod­
bird, a fish, and a
quadruped. "                                                                       ied eyes watching his disgrace. Unable to bear his shame, the king killed
The horse, snorting                                                                hirself, "covering his face so that he would not have to meet the reproach­
somewhat disdainfully,
fl gaze of his minister in the next world."
replied: "It is true you
inhabit three elements,
but you make no very                                                               Interpretation
distinguished figure in                                                            The story ofWu is a paradigm of all the empires that have come to ruin by
any one of them. You
overreaching. Drunk with success and sie with ambition, suc empires ex­
fly, indeed; but your
pand to grotesque proportions and meet a ruin that is total. This is what
flight is so heavy and
c/umsy, that you have                                                              happened to acient Athens, which lusted for the faraway island of Sicily
no right to put yourself                                                           and ended up losing its empire. The Romans stretched the boundaries of
on a level with the lark
their empire to encompass vast territories; in doing so they increased their
or the swallow. You can
vulnerability, and the chances of invasion from yet another barbarian tribe.
swim on the surface of
the waters, but you                                                                Their useless expansion led their empire into oblivion.
cannot live in them as                                                             For the Chinese, the fate of the kingdom of Wu   serves as an elemental
fishes do; you cannot
lesson on what happens when you dissipate your forces on several fronts,
find your food in that
losing sight of distant dangers for the sake of present gain. "If you are not in
element, nor g/ide
smoothly along the                                                                 danger," says Sun-tzu, "do not fight." It is almost a physical law: What is
bottom ofthe waves.                                                                bloated beyond its proportons inevitably collapses. The mind must not
And when you walk, or
wander from goal to goal, or be distracted by success fom its sense of pur­
rather waddie, upon
pose and proporton. What is concentrated, coherent, and connected to its
the ground, with your
broad feet and your                                                                past has power. What is dissipated, divided, and distended rots and falls to
long neck stretched out,                                                           the ground. The bigger it bloats, the harder it falls.
1 72                                                                               LAW 2 3

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW                                                          hissing at everyone
who passes by, you
The Rothschild banking family had humble beginnings in the Jewish
bring upon yourself the
ghetto of Frankfurt, Germany. The city's harsh laws made it impossible for
derision ofall behold·
Jews to mingle outside the ghetto, but the Jews had tured this into a          ers. I confess that I am
only formed to move
virte-it made them self-reliant, and zealous to preserve their culture at
upon the ground; but
a costs. Mayer Amschel, the first of the Rothschilds t accumulate wealth
how graceful is my
by lending money, in the late eighteenth century, weIl understood te           makel How weil turned
power that comes fom this kind of concentraton and cohesion.                   my limbs! How highly
First, Mayer Amschel alied hirself with one family, the power                  finished my whole
                                                                               body! How great my
princes of Thur und Taxis. Instead of spreading his services out, he made
                                                                               strength! How aston­
hmself these princes' primary banker. Second, he entsted none of his           ishing my speed! I had
business to outsiders, using only his children and close relatives. The more   much rather be
confined to one
unified and tight-knit the family, the more powerfl it would become. Soon
element, and be
Mayer Amschel's five sons were running the business. And when Mayer
admired in that, than
Aschel lay dying, in 1812, he refsed to name a principal heir, instead set­    be a goose in all! "
tg up all of his sons to contnue · the family traditon, so that tey would      FABLES FROM
BOCCACCIO AND
stay united and would resist the dangers of diffsion and of infiltraton by
CHAUCER,
outsiders.                                                                     DR. JOHN AIKIN,
1 747-1 822
Once Mayer Amschel's sons controlled the family business, they de­
cided tat the key to wealth on a larger scae was to secure a foothold in te
fnaces of Europe as a whole, rather tan being ted to ay one country or
pree. Of the five brothers, Natan had already opened up shop in Lon­
don. I  1813 Jaes moved t  Paris. Amschel remained in Frankrt,
Salomon established hirself in Vienna, ad Kr, the youngest son, went
to Naples. With each sphere of influence covered, they could tghten their      Beware of dissipating
hold on Europe's financia markets.                                             your powers; strive
constantly to concen­
This widespread network, of course, opened the Rotschilds t the
trate them. Genius
very dager of which their fater had wared tem: diffusion, division, dis­
thinks it can do what­
sension. They avoided this danger, and established themselves as the most      ever it sees others
powerfl force in European finance and politics, by once again resortng to      dOing, but it is sure to
repent of every ill­
te strategy of the ghetto--excluding outsiders, concentratng teir forces.
judged outlay.
The Rothschilds established the fastest courier system in Europe, allowing
JOHANN VON GOETHE,
tem to get news of events before al their compettors. They held a virtual      1749-1832
monopoly on information. And their interal communications and corre­
spondence were written in Frankfrt Yiddish, ad in a code that only the
broters could decipher. There was no point in steaing this information­
no one could understand it. "Even the shewdest bankers cannot find their
way trough the Rothschild maze," admitted a finacier who had tried to
inltate te clan.
In 1824 James Rothschild decided it was time to get married. This pre­
sented a problem for te Rothschilds, since it meant incorporatng an out­
sider into the Rothschild cla, an outsider who could betray its secrets.
Jaes therefore decided to marry within the family, and chose the daugh­
tr of his brother Salomon. The brothers were ecstatic-this was the per­
feet soluton t their marriage problems. James's choice now became the
faily  policy:  Two  years  later,  Nathan  maried  off his  daughter  to
LAW 23                                                                         1 73

Salomon's son. In the years to come, t e  five brothers arranged eighteen
matches among their cbildren, sixteen of these being contracted between
first cousins.
"We ae like the mechaism of a watch: Each part is essentia," said
broter Salomon. As in a watch, every pat of the business moved in con­
cert wit every other, and te inner workings were invisible to the world,
which only saw the movement of the hands. While other rich ad powerfl
families suffered irrecoverable downturs during the tumultous first half of
the nineteenth century, the tight-knit Rotschilds managed not only to pre­
serve but to expand their unprecedented wealth.
Interpretation
The Rothschilds were bor in strange tmes. They came from a place that
had not changed in centuries, but lived in an age that gave birth to the In­
dustria Revolution, te French Revoluton, ad an  endless series of up­
heavals.   The   Rothchilds  kept  te   past   alive,  resisted  the   patters   of
dispersion of teir era and for this are emblematc of the law of concentra­
tion.
No one represents this better than James Rothschild, the son who es­
tablished himself in Paris. In bis lifetime James witessed te defeat of
Napoleon, the restoration of te Bourbon monarchy, the bourgeois monar­
chy of Orleans, te retur to a republic, and finaly the enthronement of
Napoleo \ IH. French styles ad fashions changed at a relentless pace dur­
ing  all trus  turmoil.  Without  appearing to  be  a relic of te  past, James
steered his family as if the ghetto lived on within tem. He kept aive his
clan's inner cohesion and strengt. Only through suc an achoring in the
past was te family able to thrive amidst such chaos. Concentation was the
foundation of the Rotschilds' power, weath, and stability.
The best strategy is always to be very strong; first in general, then
at the decisive point                                                                 There is no higher and simpler law of strategy
than that of keeping one's forces concentrated                                        In short the
first principle is: act with the utmost concentration.
On War, Carl von Clauewitz, 1 780-1831
KEYS TO POWER
The world is plagued by greater and greater division-within counties,
political groups, f                                                                   ailies, even individuals. We   ae al in a state of tota dis­
tracton and dif                                                                       sion, hardly able to keep our minds in one directon be­
fore we  are pulled in  a tousand  others.  The  modem world's level  of
conflict is higher than ever, ad we have interalized it in our own lives.
The solution is a form of reteat inside ourselves, to the past, to more
concentated forms of tought and action. As Schopenhauer wrote, "Intel­
lect is a magnitude of intensity, not a magnitude of extensity." Napoleon
knew the value of concentratng your forces at te enemy's weakest spot-
1 74                                                                                  LAW 23

it was the secret of his success on the battlefield. But his willpower and his
mind were equally modeled on this notion. Single-mindedness of purpose,
total concentation on the goal, and the use of these qualities against peo­
pIe less focused, people in a state of distracton-such an arrow will find its
mark every time and overwhelm the enemy.
Casanova attributed his success in life to his ability to concentate on a
single goal and push at it until it yielded. It was his ability to give hirself
over completely to the women he desired that made hir so intensely se­
ductive. For the weeks or months that one of these women lived in his
orbit, he thought of no one else. When he was imprisoned in the teacher­
ous "leads" of the doge's palace in Venice, a prison fom which no one had
ever escaped, he concentrated his mind on the single goa of escape, day
aer day. A change of cells, whic meant that months of digging had all
been for naught, did not discourage hir; he persisted and eventually es­
caped. "I have always believed," he later wrote, "that when a man gets it
into his head to do something, and when he exclusively occupies hirselfin
tat design, he must succeed, whatever the difficulties. That man will be­
come Grand Vizier or Pope."
Concentrate ( l a single goal, a single task, and beat it into submission.
In the world of power you will constantIy need help fom other people,
usually those more powerfl than you. The fool flits fom one person to an­
other, believing that he will survive by spreading hirself out. It is a corol­
la of the law of concentration, however, that muc energy is saved, and
more power is attained, by affixing yourself to a single, appropriate source
of power. The scientst Nikola Tesla ruined hirself by believing that he
somehow maintained his independence by not having to serve a single
master. He even tured down J. P. Morgan, who offered hir a rich con­
tact. In the end, Tesla's "independence" meant that he could depend on
no single paton, but was always having to toady up to a dozen of them.
Later in his life he realized his mistake.
All the great Renassance painters and writers wrestIed with this prob­
lem,  none more  so than  the  sixteenth-century writer Pietro Aretno.
Troughout his life Aretno suffered the indignities of having to pIease this
prince and that. At last, he had had enough, and decided to woo Charles
V, promising the emperor the services of his powerful pen. He fnally dis­
covered the freedom that came fom attachment to a single source of
power. Michelangelo found this freedom with Pope Julius H, Galileo with
the Medicis. In the end, the single patron appreciates your loyalty and be­
comes dependent on your services; in the long run the master serves the
slave.
Finally, power itself always exists in concentated forms. In any orga­
nizaton it is inevitable for a small group to hold the stings. And often it is
not those with the ttIes. In the game of power, only the fool fls about
wthout fixing his target. You must find out who controls the operatons,
who is the real director behind the scenes. As Richelieu discovered at the
beginning of his rise to the top of the French political scene during the
LAW 2 3                                                                           1 75

early seventeenth century, itwas not King Louis XIII who decided things,
it was the king's mother. And so he attached hirself to her, and catapulted
through the ra                                                                        s of the courters, all the way to the top.
It is enough to stike oil once-your wealth and power are assured for
a lifetime.
Image: The Arrow. You cannot hit two targets
with one arrow. If your thoughts stray, you
miss the enemy's heart. Mind and
arrow must become one. Only
with such concentration of
mental  and  physical
power can your arrow
hit the target and
pierce the
heart.
Authority: Prize intensity more than extensity. Perfection re­
sides in quality, not quantity. Extent alone never rises above
mediocrity, and it is the misfortune of men with wide general
interests that while they would like to have their finger in every
pie, they have one in none. Intensity gives eminence, and rises
to the heroic in matters sublime. (Baltasar Graciän, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
There are dangers in concentation, and moments when dispersion is the
proper tactical move. Fighting the Nationaists for control of China, Mao
Tse-tung and the Communists fought a protracted war on several fonts,
using sabotage and ambush as their main weapons. Dispersal is ofen suit­
able for the weaker side; it is, in fact, a crucial principle of guerrilla warfare.
When fighting a stonger army, concentating YOUf forces only makes you
an easier target-better to dissolve into the scenery and fustrate your
enemy with the elusiveness of YOUf presence.
Tying YOUfself to a single SOUfce of power has one preeminent danger:
If that person dies, leaves, or falls from grace, you suff er. This is what hap­
pened to Cesae Borgia, who derived his power fom his father, Pope
Alexander VI. It was the pope who gave Cesare armies to fight with and
wars to wage in his name. When he suddenly died (perhaps from poison),
1 76                                                                                  LAW 23

Cesare was as good as dead. He had made far too many enemies over the
years, and was now without his father's protection. In cases when you may
need protection, then, it is often wise to entwine YOUfseif around several
sources of power. Such a move would be especially prudent in periods of
geat tumult and violent chage, or when YOUf enemies are numerous. The
more patrons and masters you serve the less risk you run if one of them
fals fom power. Such dispersion will even allow you to play one off
aanst the other. Even if you concentrate on the single SOUfce of power,
you stll must practice cauton, ad I cepare for the day when YOUf master
or patron is no longer there to help you.
Finally, being too single-minded in purpose ca make you an intolera­
ble bore, especially in the arts. The Renaissance painter Paolo Uccello was
so obsessed with perspectve that his paintngs look lifeless and contrived.
Wereas Leonardo da Vinci interested himself in everything-architec­
tre, panting, warfare, sculpture, mechaics. Difsion was the source of
his power. But such genius is rare, and the rest of us are better off erring on
te side of intensity.
LAW 2 3                                                                           1 77

L                                                              W
24
PLAY THE PERFECT
C OURTIER
JUDGMENT
The perfect courtier thrives in a world where everything
revolves around power and political dexterty. He has
mastered the art of indirection; he flattes, yields to supe­
riors, and assets power over others in the most oblique
and graceul manne  Lear  and apply     the laws of
courtieship and there will be no limit to howfar you can
rse in the court.
1 78

COURT SOCIETY
I is a fact of human nature t  t te structure of a court society forms itself
filE T\() DOC,
aound power. In te past;' lie court gatered around the roler, and had
Barbos, the faithful
many fnctions: Besides keeping te roler                                                aused, it was a way to solidif
yard-dog who serves
te hierarchy of royaty, nobility, and te upper classes, and to keep the
his master zealously.
nobility both sub ordinate and elose to the ruler, so that he could keep an            happens to see his old
eye   on them. The court serves power in many ways, but most of all it glori­          aequaintance Joujou,
the eurly lapdog, seated
fies the roler, providing him with a microcosmic world that must stuggle
at the window on a soft
t pIease him.
down cushion. Sidling
To    be a courter was a dangerous ga                                                  e. A nineteent-century Aa                    fondly up to her, like a
child to a parent, he all
taveler  to  the  court  of Da                                                         r,  in  what is  now  Suda,  reported  tat
but weeps with
courters there had to do whatever the sultan did: If he were injured, they
emotion; and there,
had   to suffer te same injury; if he fell off his horse during a hunt, tey fell,
under the window, he
too. Mimicry like this appeared in courts all over te world. More trouble­             whines, wags his tai!,
und bounds about.
same was te danger of displeaing the roler-one wrong move spelled
"What sort of life do
deat or exile. The successfl courtier had to wak a tightrope, pleasing but
you lead now,
not pleasing too much, obeying but somehow distinguishing himself fom                  Joujoutka, ever since
te  oter  courters, while  also never distnguishing himself so  far  as  to            the master lOok you
into his mansion? You
make the roler insecure.
remember, no doubt,
Great courtiers troughout history have matered te science of ma­
how we often used 10
nipulatng people. They make te king feel more kingly; tey make every­                  suffer hunger out in Ihe
one else fea teir power. They are magicians of appearance, knowing that                yard. What is your
present service like? "
most tings at court are judged by how they seem. Great courters ae gra­
, lt would be a sin in
cious  and polite;  their  aggression is veiled and indirect.  Masters  of te
me to murmur against
word, tey never say more than necessary, getting the most out of a com­                my good fortune, "
pliment or hidden insult. They are magnets of pleasure-people want to be               answers .foujolltka.
"My master cannot
around them because tey know how to please, yet tey neiter fawn nor
make enough ofme. /
humiliate temselves. Great courtiers become the king's favorites, enjoying
live amidst riches and
te benefits of tat position. They often end up more power                              than the                                     plenty, and I eat an<!
ruer, for tey are wizards in the accumulaton of influence.                                                                          drink off si/ver. I fro!ic
with the master, and, if
Many today dismiss court life as a relic of the past, a historical curios­
/ get ti red, I take my
ity. They reason, according to Machiavelli, "as though heaven, te sun, te
case on carpets or on a
elements, ad men had changed the order of teir motions and power, and                  soft  couch. And how do
were different fom what tey were in ancient tmes." There may be no                     you get on? "  "I? "
replies Barbos, letting
more Sun Kings but there ae stll plenty of people who believe the sun re­
his tai! dangle like a
volves around tem. The royal cout may have more or less disappeared,
whip. and hanging his
or at least lost its power, but courts and courters stll exist because power           head. "I live as I llsed
stl exists. A courtier is rarely asked to fall off a horse aymore, but the             to do. I suffer from
cold and hunger; anti
laws tat govem court politcs ae as tmeless as te laws of power. There is
here, while guarding
much to be leamed, then, from great courters past and present.                         my master:, house, [
have to sleep at the foot
ofthe wall, and / get
drenched in the rain.
THE LAWS OF C O U RT P O LIT I C S
And if I bark at the
wrong time, [ am
Avoid Ostentaton.  I t i s  never prodent t o  prattle o n  about yourself o r  call   whipped. But how did
                                                                                       you, Joujou, who were
tO much attention to your actons. The more you talk about your deeds
                                                                                       LAW 24                                       1 79

sn small and weak, gel                                                           the more suspicion you cause. You also stir up enough envy among your
taken into fa vor, while
peers to induce teachery and backstabbing. Be carefl, ever so caefl, in
1 jump out ofmy skin
trumpetng your own achievements,  ad always                                      t                                                                                less ab out yourself
to no purpose?
Whal is it you do? "                                                             than about other people. Modesty is generally preferable.
" 'Whal is il you do? ' A
pretty question 10 ask!"
Practice Nonchalance. Never seem to be working too hard. Your talent
replied ]oujou, mock­
must appear to flow naturally, with an ease that makes people take you for
ingly. "I walk upon my
hind legs. "                                                                     a genius rather than a workaholic. Even when something demands a lot of
FAHLES,                                                                          sweat, make it look effortless-people prefer to not see your blood and toil,
IVAN K RILOFF,
which is another form of ostentation. It is better for them to marvel at how
1 768                                                                            1 844
graceflly you have achieved your accomplishment than to wonder why it
took so much work.
Be  Frugal  with  Flattery.  It may  seem that your superiors cannot get
enough flattery, but too much of even a good thing loses its value. It also
stirs up suspicion among your peers. Leam to flatter indirectly-by down­
It i.l· a wise thing t be
playing your own contribution, for example, to make your master look bet­
polite; consequenlly, it
ter.
is a slupid thing to he
rude. To   make enemies
by unnecessary and                                                               Arrange to Be Notced.  There is a paradox: You cannot display yourself
wilful incivility, ü jusl
too brazenly, yet you must also get yourself noticed. In the court of Louis
as insane a proceeding
XIV, whoever the king decided to look at rose instantly in the court hierar­
as to sei your house on
/ire. For politeness is                                                          chy. You stand no chance of rising if the ruler does not notice you in the
like a counler-an                                                                swamp of courtiers. This task requires much                                      a. It is ofen initially a matter
avowedly false coin,
of being seen, in the literal sense. Pay attention to your physical appear­
wilh which il is foolish
ance, then, and find a way to create a distnctve-a subtly distnctve-style
10 be slingy. A sensible
man will he generolls                                                            and image.
in Ihe use "f it                                                                 Wax,
a substance nalurally
                                                                                                                                                                  Alter Your Style  and Language  According to  the Person You Are
hard and brittle, can he
made sofl hy Ihe applz­                                                                                                                                           Dealing  With. The pseudo-belief in equality-the idea that talking and
calion of a little                                                               actng the sa                                                                     e way with everyone, no matter what their rank, makes you
warmlh, so Ihal it will
somehow a paragon of civilization-is a terrible mistake. Those below you
lake any shape you
will take it as a form of condescension, which it is, and those above you will
please. In Ihe mme
way, hy being polite                                                             be offended, although they may not admit it. You must change your style
and friendly, you can                                                            and your way of speaing to suit each person. This is not lying, it is actng;
make people pliahle
and actng is a                                                                   a, not a gf fom God. Le                                                          a                                                                             the art. This is aso true for
and ohliging, even
the great vaiety of cultures found in the modem court: Never asume that
Ihough they are apl (0
he crabhed and malev­                                                            your criteria of behavior and judgment are universa. Not only is an inabil­
olent. Hence politeness                                                          ity to adapt to another culture the height of barbarism, it puts you at a dis­
is 10 human natlre
advantage.
what warmth is to wax.
A RT H U R
SCHOPENHAUER,                                                                                                                                                     Never Be the Bearer of Bad News. The king kills the messenger who
1 788                                                                            1860                                                                             brings bad news: This is a diche but there is tuth to it. You must struggle
                                                                                                                                                                  and if necessay lie and cheat to be sure that the lot of the bearer of bad
                                                                                                                                                                  news falls on a colleague, never on you.  Bring only good news and your
                                                                                                                                                                  approach will gladden your master.
180                                                                              LAW 24

Never                                                                            A     ect Friendliness and Intracy wit Your Master.  He does
not want a friend for a subordinate, he wants a subordinate. Never ap­
proach hir in an easy, friendly way, or act as if you are on the best of
ters-that is hi prerogative. If he chooses to deal with you on this level,
assume a wary chumminess. Otherwise err in te opposite directon, and
make the distace between you clear.
Never  Critcize                                                                  T     ose  Above You Directly.  This may seem obvious,
but tere are often times when some sort of critcism is necessary-to say
noting, or to give no advice, would open you to risks of another sort. You
must leam, however, to couch YOUf advice and critcism as indirectly and as
politely as possible. Think twice, or three tmes, before deciding you have
made them sufficiently circuitous. Err on the side of subtlety and gentleness.
Be Frugal in Asking                                                              T     ose Above You for Favors.  Nothing irritates a
master more than having to reject someone's request. It stirs up guilt and
resentent. Ask for favors as rarely as possible, and know when to stop.
Rather than making YOUfself the supplicant, it is always better to eam YOUf
favors, so that the ruler bestows them willingly. Most important: Do not ask
for favors on another person's behalf, least of all a friend's.
Never Joke About Appearances or Taste.  A lively wit and a humorous
dispositon ae essential qualites for a good courtier, and there are times
when vulgarity is appropriate and engaging. But avoid any kind of joke
about appearance or taste, two highly sensitve areas, especially with those
above you. Do not even ty it when you are away fom them. You will dig
YOU OW grave.
Do Not Be te Court                                                               C     nic.  Express admiration for the good work of
oters. If you constantly critcize YOUf equals or subordinates some of that
critcism will rub off on you, hovering over you like a gray cloud wherever
you go. People will groan at each new cynical comment, ad you will irri­
tate them .  By expressing modest admiration for other people's achieve­
ments, you paradoxically call attention to your OW. The ability to express
wonder and amaement, ad seem like you mean it, is a rare and dying tal­
ent, but one stll greatly valued.
Be Self-observant. The mirror is a miraculous inventon; without it you
would commit great sins against beaut and decorum. You also need a mir­
ror for your actions. This ca sometimes come fom other people telling
you what they see in you, but that is not the most trustworthy method: Yu
must be the mirror, taining your mind to ty to see YOUfself as others see
you. Are you actng too obsequious? Are you tying too hard to please? Do
you seem desperate for attenton, giving the impression that you ae on the
decline? Be observant about YOUfself and you will avoid a mountan of
blunders.
LAW 2 4                                                                          181

Master Your Emotions.  A s  an actor i n  a great play, you must l e              a        to cry
and laugh on command and when it is appropriate. You must be able both
to disguise your ager ad fustration and to fake your contentment and
agreement. You must be the master of your own face. Call it lying if you
like; but if you prefer to not play the game and to aways be honest and up­
front, do not complain when others call you obnoxious and arrogant.
Fit  the  Spirit  of the  Times.  A slight affeetation of a past era can be
charming, as long as you choose a period at least twenty yeas back; wear­
ing the fashions of ten years ago is ludicrous, unless you enjoy the role of
court jester. Your spirit ad way of thinking must keep up with the times,
even if the times offend your sensibilities. Be too forwad-thinking, how­
ever, and no one will understand you. It is never a good idea to stand out
too much in this area; you are best off at least being able to mimic the spirit
of the times.
Be a Source of Pleasure. This is critical. It is an obvious law of human
nature that we will flee what is unpleasant and distastefl, while charm and
the promise of delight will draw us like moths to a flame. Make yourself te
flame and you will rise to te top. Since life is otherwise so full of unpleas­
antness and pleasure so scarce, you will be as indispensable as food and
drink. This may seem obvious, but what is obvious is often ignored or un­
appreciated. There are degrees to this: Not everyone can play the role of
favorite, for not everyone is blessed with charm and wit. But we can al
control our unpleasant qualities and obscure them when necessary.
A man who knows the court is master of  his gestures, of  his ees and
of his face; he is profound, impenetrable; he dissimulates bad offices,
smiles at his enemies, controls his irritation, disguises his passions,
belies his heart, speaks and acts against his feelings.
Jean de La Bruyere, 1 645-1 696
SCENES OF COURT LIFE: Exemplary Deeds and Fatal Mistakes
Scene I
Alexander the Great, conqueror of the Mediterranean basin and the Mid­
dIe East through to India, had had the great Aristotle as his ttor and men­
tor, and throughout his short life he remained devoted to philosophy and
his master's teachings. He  once complained to Aristotle that during his
long campaigns he had no one with whom he could discuss philosophical
matters. Aristotle responded by suggesting that he take Calisthenes, a for­
mer pupil  of Aristotle's and  a promising philosopher in  his  own  right,
along on the next campaign.
Aristotle had schooled Callisthenes in the skills of being a courtier, but
182                                                                               LAW 24

te young man secretly scoffed at them. He believed in pure philosophy, in
unadored words, in speaking the naked truth. If Alexander loved lea              ng
so much, Calistenes thought, he could not object to one who spoke his
mind. During one of Alexander's major campaigns, Callistenes spoke his
mind one too many tmes and Alexander had him put to death.
Interpretation
In court, honesty is a fool's game. Never be so self-absorbed as to believe
tat the master is interested in your critcisms of hir, no matter how accu­
rate they ae.
Scene II
Beginning in the Han Dynasty two thousand years ago, Chinese scholars
compiled a series of writngs called the 27 Histories, an official biography of
each dynasty, including stories, statstcs, census figures, and wa chroni­
des. Each history also contained a chapter called  "Unusual Events," and
here, among the listngs of earthquaes and floods, there would sometimes
suddenly appear descriptions of such bizarre manifestatons as two-headed
sheep, geese flying backward, stas suddenly appeaing in different parts of
te sky, ad so on. The earthquakes could be historically verified, but the
monsters and weird natural phenomena were clealy inserted on purpose,
ad invariably occurred in clusters. What could this mean?
The Chinese emperor was considered more than a man-he was a
force of nature. His kingdom was the center of the universe, and every­
ting revolved aound hir. He embodied the world's perfection. To    crit­
cie hir or any of his actions would have been to critcize the divine order.
No minister or courter dared approach the emperor with even the slightest
cautonay word.  But emperors were fallible  and the kingdom suffered
geatly by teir mistakes. Inserting sightngs of strange phenomena into the
court chronicles was the only way to wa                                          them. The emperor would read
of geese fying backward and moons out of orbit, ad realize tat he was
being cautioned. His actions were unbaancing the universe and needed to
chage.
Interpretation
For   Chinese courters, the problem of how to give the emperor advice was
a                                                                                important issue. Over the yeas, thousands of them had died tying to
wa                                                                               or counsel their master. To   be made safely, their critcisms had to be
idrect-yet i they were  too indirect they would not be heeded.  The
cronicles were their solution: Identif no one person as the source of criti­
cism, make the advice as impersonal as possible, but let the emperor know
te gavity of the situaton.
Your master is no longer the center of the universe, but he stll imag­
ies that everything revolves around hir. When you critcize hir he sees
te person criticizing, not the critcism itself. Like the Chinese courtiers,
you must find a way to disappear behind the wa                                   ing. Use symbols and
oter indirect methods to paint a pictre of the problems to come, without
puttng your neck on the line.
LAW 24                                                                           183

Scene III
Early in his caeer, the French architect Jules Mansart received commis­
sions to design minor additons to Versailles for King Louis XV For each
design he would draw up his plans, maing sure they followed Louis's in­
stuctons closely. He would then present them to His Majesty.
The  courter Saint-Simon  described Mansat's  tecnique in  dealing
with the king:  "His particular skill was to show the king plans that pur­
posely included something imperfect about tem,  often dealing with the
gardens, which were not Masart's specialty.  The king,  as  Mansart ex­
pected, would put his finger exactly on the problem and propose how to
solve it, at which point Mansart would exclaim for all to hear that he would
never have seen the problem that the king had so masterflly found and
solved; he would burst with admiraton, confessing that next to the king he
was but a lowly pupil." At the age of thirty, having used these methods
tme and time again, Mansart received a prestgious royal commission: Al­
though   he  was  less  talented  and  experienced  tan  a number of other
French designers, he was to take charge of the enlagement of Versailles.
He was the king's architect fom then on.
Interpretation
As a young man, Mansart had seen how many royal crasmen in the ser­
vice of Louis XIV had lost their positons not through a lack of talent but
through a costly social blunder. He would not mae that mistake. Mansart
always stove to make Louis feel better about hirself, to feed the king's
vanity as publicly as possible.
Never imagine that skill and talent are all that matter.  In court the
courter's art is more important than his talent; never spend so much tme
on your studies that you neglect your social skills. And the greatest skill of
all is the ability to make te master look more talented than those around
hir.
Scene IV
Jean-Baptiste Isabey had become the unofficial painter of the Napoleonic
court. During the  Congress of Vienna in  1814, after Napoleon, defeated,
had been imprisoned on the island of Elba, the partcipants in these meet­
ings, which were to decide the fate of Europe, invited Isabey to immorta­
ize the historie events in an epic paintng.
When Isabey arived in Vienna, Taleyrad, the main negotiator for
the French, paid the artist a visit. Considering his role in    the proceedings,
the statesman explained, he expected to occupy center stage in the pant­
ing. Isabey cordially agreed. A few days later the Duke of Wellington, the
main negotiator for the English, also approaced Isabey, and  sad muc
the same thing that Talleyrand had. The ever polite Isabey agreed that te
great duke should indeed be te center of attention.
Back in his studio, Isabey pondered the dilemma. If he gave the spot­
light to either of the two men, he could create a diplomatie rif, stirring up
all sorts of resent                                                                ent at a tme  when peace and concord were critical.
184                                                                                LAW 24

When  the paintng was finally unveiled, however, both Talleyrand  and
Wellington feIt honored and satisfied. The work depicts a large hal filled
wth diplomats and politcians fom all over Europe. On one side the Duke
of Wellington enters the room, and all eyes are                                ted toward him; he is
te "center" of attention. In the very center of the paintng, meanwhile, sits
Taleyrand.
Interpretation
It is ofen very difficult to satisf the master, but to satisf two masters in
one stroke takes the genius of a great courter. Such predicaments are com­
mon in the life of a courtier: By giving attenton to one master, he dis­
pleases another. You must find a way to navigate this Scylla ad Charybdis
saely. Masters must receive their due; never inadvertently stir up the re­
sentent of one in pleasing another.
Scene V
George Brummell, also known as Beau Brummell, made his mark in the
late 1700s by the supreme elegance of his appearance, his popularization of
shoe buckles (soon imitated by all the dadies), and his clever way with
words. His London house was the fashionable spot in town, ad Brummell
was the authority on all matters of fashion. If he disliked your footwear,
you immediately got rid of it and bought whatever he was wearing. He per­
feeted the                                                                     a                       of tying a cravat; Lord Byron was said to spend many a night
i front of the mirror tying to figure out the secret behind Brummell's per­
feet knots.
One of Brummell's greatest admirers was the Prince of Waes, who
fancied  himself  a  fashionable  young  man.  Becoming  attached  to  the
prnce's court (and provided with a royal pension), Brummell was soon so
sure of his own authority there that he took to joking about the prince's
weight, referring to his host as Big Ben. Since trimness of figure was a im­
pornt quality for a dady, this was a withering critcism. At dinner once,
when the service was slow, Brummell said to the prince, "Do ring, Big
Ben." The prince rang, but when the valet arrived he ordered the man to
show Brummell the door and never admit him again.
Despite falling into the prince's disfavor, Brummell contnued to teat
everyone  around him  with  the  same  arrogace.  Without the  Prince  of
Waes' patronage to support him, he sak into horrible debt, but he main­
tned his insolent manners, and everyone soon abadoned him. He died
i the most pitiable poverty, alone and deranged.
Interretation
Beau Brummell's devastatng wit was one of te qualities that endeared
hi to the Pince o f Waes. But not even he, the arbiter of taste ad fashion,
could get away with a joke about the prince's appearace, least of a to his
fae. Never joke about a person's plumpness, even indirectly-and pa             cu­
lay when he is your master. The poorhouses of history are filled with peo­
pIe who  have made such jokes at their master's expense.
LAW 2 4                                                                        185

Scene VI
Pope Urban VIII wanted to be remembered for his skiUs in writng poetry,
which unfortunately were mediocre at best. In                                  1629 Duke Francesco
d'Este, knowing the pope's literary pretensions, sent the poet Fulvio Testi
as his ambassador to the Vatcan. One of Test's letters to the duke reveas
why he was chosen: "Once our discussion was over, I kneeled to depat,
but His Holiness made a signal and waked to another room where he
sleeps, and after reaching a small table, he grabbed a bundle of papers and
thus, tuming to me with a smiling face, he said: 'We want Your Lordship to
listen to some of our compositions.' And, in fact, he read me two very long
Pindaric poems, one in praise of the most holy Virgin, ad the other one
ab out Countess Matilde."
We   do not know exactly what Test thought of these very long poems,
since it would have been dagerous for hir to state his opinion freely,
even in a letter. But he went on to write, "I, following the mood, com­
mented on each line with the needed praise, and, aer having kissed His
Holiness's foot for such a unusual sign of benevolence [the reading of the
poetry], I left." Weeks later, when the duke hirself visited the pope, he
managed to recite entre verses of the pope's poety ad prased it enough
to mae the pope "so jubilant he seemed to lose his mind."
Interpretation
In matters of taste you can never be too obsequious with your master. Taste
is one of te ego's prickliest parts; never impugn or queston the master's
taste-his poety is sublime, his dress impeccable, ad his manner the
model for all.
Scene VII
One aftemoon in ancient China, Chao, ruler of Ha fom 358 to 333 B.C.,
got drunk and fell asleep in te palace gardens. The court crown-keeper,
whose sole task was to look afer the ruler's head appael, passed through
the gardens and saw his master sleeping without a coat. Since it was gettng
cold, the crown-keeper placed his own coat over the ruler, and left.
When Chao awoke and saw the coat upon hir, he asked his atten­
dants, "Who put more clothes on my body?" "The crown-keeper," they
replied. The ruler immediately caled for his official coat-keeper and had
hir punished for neglecting his duties. He aso called for the crown­
keeper, whom he had beheaded.
Interpretation
Do not overstep your bounds. Do what you are assigned to do, to the best
of your abilites, ad never do more. To   tink that by doing more you are
doing better is a common blunder. It is never good to seem to be trying too
hard-it is as if you were covering up some deficiency. Fulfilling a task tat
has not been asked of you just makes people suspicious. If you are a crown­
keeper, be a crown-keeper. Save your excess energy for when you are not
in the court.
186                                                                            LAW 24

Scene VIII
One day, for amusement, the Italian Renaissance painter Fra Filippo Lippi
(1406- 1469) and some friends went sailing in a small boat off Ancona.
There they were captured by two Moorish galleys, which hauled them off
in chans to Barbary, where they were sold as slaves. For eighteen long
months Filippo toiled with no hope of returing to ltaly.
On several occasions Filippo saw te ma who had bought hir pass
by, and one day he decided to sketch this man's portrait, using but
coal-charcoal-from the fire. Stll in his chains, he found a white wall,
where he drew a fll-Iength likeness of his owner in Moorish clothing. The
owner soon heard about tis, for no one had seen such skill in drawing be­
fore in these parts; it seemed like a miracle, a gif fom God. The drawing
so pleased the owner that he instantly gave Filippo his freedom and em­
ployed hir in his court. All the big men on the Barbary coast came to see
te magnificent color portaits that Fra Filippo then proceeded to do, and
fnaly,  in grattude for the honor in this way brought upon hir, Filippo's
owner retured the atist safely to ltaly.
Interpretation
We   who toil for other people have all in some way been captred by pi­
rates and sold into slavery. But like Fra Filippo (if to a lesser degree), most
of us possess some gift, same talent, an ability to do something better than
oter people. Mae your master a gift of YOUf talents ad you will rise
above other courtiers. Let hir take te credit if necessary, it will only be
temporary: Use hir as a stepping stone, a way of displaying your talent
ad eventually buying your freedom from enslavement.
Scene IX
Alfonso 1 of Aragon once had a servant who told the king tat te night
before he had had a dream: Alfonso had given hir a gif of weapons,
horses, and clothes. Alfonso, a generous, lordly man, decided it would be
ausing to make this dream come true, and promptly gave the servant
exaetly these gifts.
A little while later, the same servat announced to Alfonso that he had
had yet another dream, and in this one Alfonso had given hir a consider­
able pile of gold florins. The king smiled and said, "Don't believe in
dreams from now on; they He."
Interpretation
In his treatment of the servant's first dream, Alfonso remained in control.
By making a dream come true, he claimed a godlike power for hirself, if
i a mild and humorous way. In the second drea, however, all appea­
aee of magic was gone; this was nothing but an ugly con game on the ser­
vant's part. Never ask for too much, then, and know when to stop. It is the
master's prerogative to give-to give when he wats and what he wants,
and to do so without promptng. Do not give hir te chance to reject your
requests. Better to win favors by deserving them, so tat they are bestowed
wtout your asking.
LAW 24                                                                            187

Scene X
The great English landscape painter J. M. W Turer (1775-1851) was
known for his use of color, which he applied with a brilliace and a stange
iridescence. The color in his paintings was so striking, in fact, that other
atists never wated his work hung next to theirs: It inevitably made every­
thing around it seem dull.
The painter Sir Thomas Lawrence once had the misfortne of seeing
Turer's masterpiece Cologe hangng in an exhibition between two works
of his own. Lawrence complained bitterly to the galler owner, who gave
hir no satisfacton: Afer all,  someone's paintngs had to hang next to
Turer's. But Turer heard of Lawrence's complaint, and before the exhibi­
tion opened, he toned down the brilliant golden sky in Cologne, making it        a
dull as the colors in Lawrence's works. A friend of Turer's who saw the
painting approached the artst with a horrified look: "W                          at have you done
to your picture!" he said. "Well, poor Lawrence was so unhappy," Turer
replied, "and it's only lapblack. It'll wash off afer the exhibition."
Interpretation
May of a courtier's                                                              aieties have to do with the master, with whom most
dangers lie. Yet it is a mistake to imagine that the master is the only one to
detennine your fate. Your equals ad subordinates play integral parts also.
A court is a vast stew of resentments, fears, and power envy. You have to
placate everyone who might someday hann you, deflecting their resent­
ment ad envy and diverting their hostlity onto other people.
Turer, eminent courter, knew that his good fortune and fae de­
pended on his fellow painters as well as on his deaers and patons. How
many of the great have been felled by envious colleagues! Better tempora­
ily to dull your brilliance than to suffer the slings and arows of envy.
Scene XI
Winston Churchill was a amateur ast, and afer World War 11 his paint­
ings became collector's items. The American publisher Henry Luce, i
fact, creator of Time ad Li magazines, kept one of Churchill's landscapes
hanging in his private office in New York.
On a tour through the United States once, Churchill visited Luce in his
office, and the two men looked at the painting together. The publisher re­
marked, "It's a good picture, but I think it needs something in the fore
ground-a sheep, perhaps." Muc to Luce's horror, Churchill's secreta
caled the publisher the next day and asked hir to have the painting sent
to Englad. Luce did so, mortified that he had perhaps offended the former
prime minister. A few days later, however, the painting was shipped bac,
but slightly altered: a single sheep now graed peaceflly in the fore­
ground.
Interpretation
In stature ad fare, Churchill stood head and shoulders above Luce, but
Luce was certainly a man of power, so let us imagine a slight equality be
tween them. Still, what did Churchill have to fear from a American pub­
lisher? Why bow to the criticism of a dilettante ?
188                                                                              LAW 24

A court-in this case the entre world of diplomats and intematonal
statesmen, and aso of the joumalists who court them-is a place of mutual
dependence. It is unwise to insult or offend the taste of people of power,
even if they are below or equal to you. If a man like Churcill can swallow
te critcisms of a ma like Luce, he proves hirself a courtier without peer.
(Perhaps his correction of the paintng implied a certan condescension as
weIl, but he did it so subtly that Luce did not perceive any slight.) Imitate
Churchill: Put in the sheep. It is always beneficial to play the obliging
courtier, even when you are not serving a master.
TRE DELICATE GAME OF COURTIERSHIP: A Waming
Taleyrand was the consummate courtier, especially in serving his master
Napoleon. When the two men were first gettng to know each other,
Napoleon once sad in passing, "I shal come to lunc at your house one of
these days." Talleyrand had a house at Auteuil, in the suburbs of Pais. "I
should be delighted, mon general," the minister replied, "and since my
house is elose to the Bois de Boulogne, you will be able to amuse yourself
wt a bit of shootng in the afemoon."
"I do not like shooting," said Napoleon, "But I love hunting. Are there
any boars in the Bois de Boulogne?" Napoleon came fom Corsica, where
boar hunting was a great sport. By asking if there were boars in a Paris
park, he showed hirself still a provincial, almost a rube. Talleyrand did not
laugh, however, but he could not resist a practical joke on the man who
wa                                                                              now his master in politics, although not in blood and nobilit, since
Talleyrand came from an old aristocratic family. To   Napoleon's queston,
ten, he simply replied, "Very few, mon general, but I dare say you will man­
age to find one."
It was aranged that Napoleon would arrive at Talleyrad's house the
following day at seven A.M. and would spend the moming there. The "boar
hunt" would take place in the aftemoon. Throughout the moming the ex­
cited general talked nothing but boa hunting. Meanwhile, Talleyrand se­
cretly had his servants go to the market, buy two enormous black pigs, ad
take them to the great pak.
After lunch, the hunters and their hounds set off for the Bois de
Boulogne. At a secret signal fom Taleyrand, the servants loosed one of the
pigs. "I see a boar," Napoleon cried joyflly, jumping onto his horse to give
chase. Talleyrand stayed behind. It took half an hour of galloping through
the pak before te "boar" was finally captured. At the moment of tiumph,
however, Napoleon was approached by one of his aides, who knew the
creature could not possibly be a boar, and feared te general would be
ridiculed once the story got out: "Sir," he told Napoleon, "you realize of
course that this is not a boar but a pig."
Flying into a rage, Napoleon immediately set off at a gallop for Tal­
leyrand's house. He realized along the way tat he would now be the butt
of many a joke, and that exploding at Talleyrand would only make hir
LAW 24                                                                          189

more ridiculous; i t would b e  better to make a show o f good humor. Stll, he
did not hide his displeasure weIl.
Talleyrand decided to try to soothe the general's bruised ego. He told
Napoleon not to go back to Pais yet-he should agan go huntng in the
park. There were many rabbits there, ad hunting them had been a fa­
vorite pastme of Louis XVI. Talleyrad even offered to let Napoleon use a
set of guns that had once belonged to Louis. With much flattery ad cajol­
ery, he once again got Napoleon to agree to a hunt.
The party left for the pak in the late aftemoon. Along the way,
Napoleon told Taleyrand, "I'm not Louis XVI, I surely won't kill even one
rabbit." Yet that atemoon, stangely enough, the park was teeming with
rabbits. Napoleon killed at least fiy of them, and his mood changed from
anger to satisfaction. At the end of his wild shootng spree, however, the
sae aide approached hir and whispered in his ear, "To tell the truth, sir, I
am beginning to believe these ae not wild rabbits. I suspect that rascal Tal­
leyrand has played another joke on us." (The aide was right: Talleyrand
had in fact sent his servants back to the market, where they had purchased
dozens of rabbits and then had released them in the Bois de Boulogne.)
Napoleon immediately mounted his horse and galloped away, this
time retuming straght to Pais. He later threatened Talleyrad, wamed
hir not to tell a soul what had happened; if he became the laughingstoc
of Pais, there would be hell to pay.
It took months for Napoleon to be able to trust Talleyrand again, and
he never totaly forgave hir his humiliation.
Interpretation
Courtiers are like magicias: They deceptively play with appearances,
only letting those around them see what they want them to see. With so
much decepton and manipulation afoot, it is essential to keep people from
seeing your ticks and glimpsing your sleight of hand.
Talleyrand was normally the Grand Wizard of Courtiership, and but
for Napoleon's ade, he probably would have gotten away completely with
both pleasing his master and having a joke at the general's expense. But
courtership is a subtle                                                          a        , ad overlooked taps and inadvertent mistakes
can  ruin your best ticks. Never risk being caught in your maneuvers;
never let people see your devices. If that happens you instantly pass in peo­
ple's perceptons fom a courter of great manners to a loathsome rogue. It
is a delicate game you play; apply the utost attenton to covering you
tacs, ad never let your master unmask you.
190                                                                              LAW 24

LAW
25
RE- CREATE YOURSELF
JUDGMENT
Do not accept the roles that society foists on you.
Re-create yoursel by forging a ne identity,  one that
commands attention and never bores the audience. Be
the master of your own image rather than letting others
dene it for you. Incororate drmatic devices into your
public gestures and actions-your power will be en­
hanced and your character wil seem larger than lie.
191

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
Julius Caesa made his first significant mark on Roman society in 65 B.C.,
The man who intends
when he assumed the post of aedile, the official in charge of grain distribu­
to make his fortune in
this ancient capital of                                                         ton and public games. He began his entance into the public eye by orga­
the world fRome] must
nizing a series of careflly crafed and well-tmed spectacles                     wild-beast
be a chameleon suscep­
hunts,  extravagant gladiator shows, theatrical contests. On several occa­
tible of reflecting the
colors ofthe atmo­                                                              sions, he pad for these spectacles out of his own pocket. To    the common
sphere that surrounds                                                           man, Julius Caesar became indelibly associated with these much-Ioved
him-a Proteus apt to                                                            events. As he slowly rose to attan the positon of consul, his popularity
assume every form,
                                                                                among te masses served as the foundation of his power. He had created
every shape. He must
be supple, flexible,                                                            an image of hirself as a great public showman.
insinuating, dose,                                                              In 49 B.C., Rome was on the brink of a civil wa between rival leaders,
inscrutable, often base,
Caesar ad Pompey. At te height of the tension, Caesa, an addict of te
sometimes sincere,
stage, attended a theatical performance, and afterward, lost in thought, he
sometimes perfidious,
always concealing a                                                             wadered in the darkness back to his camp at the Rubicon, the river tat
part of his knowledge,                                                          divides ltaly  fom  Gaul, where he had been campaigning. To    march his
indulging in but one
army back into Itay across the Rubicon would mean te beginning of a
tone of voice, patient,
wa with Pompey.
a perfect master of his
own countenance, as                                                             Before his staff Caesar argued both sides, forming the optons like a
cold as ice when any                                                            actor on stage, a precursor of Hamlet. Finally, to put his soliloquy to an
other man would be all
end,  he  pointed  to  a seemingly innocent apparition  at the  edge  of  the
fire; and if unfortu­
river-a very tall soldier blasting a call on a tumpet, ten going across a
nttely he i not religious
at heart-a very                                                                 bridge over the Rubicon-and pronounced, "Let us accept this as a sign
common occurrence                                                               fom the Gods and follow where they beckon, in vengeance on our double­
for a soul possessing
dealing enemies. The die is cast." All of this he spoke portentously and dra­
the above requisites-
matically, gesturing toward the river and looking his generals in the eye.
he must have religion
in his mind, that is to                                                         He knew that these generas were uncertain in their support, but his ora­
say, on his face, on his                                                        tory overwhelmed them with a sense of the drama of the moment, and of
lips, in his manners; he
the need to seize the time. A more prosaic speec would never have had
must suffer quietly, if
the  same  effect. The generals rallied to his  cause; Caesa and his  army
he be an honest man,
the necessity ofknow-                                                           crossed the Rubicon and by te following year had vanquished Pompey,
ing himself an arrant                                                           maing Caesar dictator of Rome.
hypocrite. The man
In warfare, Caesar always played the leading man with gusto. He was
whose soul would
as skilIed a horseman as any of his soldiers, and took pride in outdoing
loathe such a life
should leave Rome and                                                           them  in  feats  of bravery  ad  endurance.  He  entered battle  astide  the
seek his fortune else­                                                          stongest mount, so that his  soldiers would see hir in the thic of battle,
where. I do not know
urging them on, always positioning hirself in te center, a godlike symbol
whether I am praising
of power and a model for them to follow. Of all the armies in Rome, Cae­
or excusing myself but
of all those qualities I                                                        sar's was the most devoted and loyal. His soldiers, like the common people
possessed but one­                                                              who had attended his entertainments, had come to identf with hir ad
namely, flexibility.
with his cause.
MEMOIRS,
GIOVANNI CASANOVA,                                                              Afer the defeat of Pompey, the entertainments grew in scale. Nothing
1725-1798                                                                       like them had  ever been seen in Rome. The chariot races became more
                                                                                spectacular, the gladiator fights more dramatic, as Caesar staged fights to
                                                                                the death among te  Roma nobility. He  organized enormous mock naval
                                                                                battles on an artficial lake. Plays were performed in every Roman ward. A
1 92                                                                            LAW 25

gat new theater was built that sloped dramatcally down the Tarpeian
Rck. Crowds from all over the empire flocked to these events, the roads to
Rme lined with visitors' tents. And in 45 B.C., timing his entry into the city
for maximum effect and surprise, Caesar brought Cleopata bac to Rome
aer his Egyptian campaign,  and  staged  even more extavagant public
spectacles.
These events were more than devices to divert the masses; they dra­
matically enhanced the public's sense of Caesar's character, ad made hir
seem larger tha life. Caesar was the master of his public image, of which
he was forever aware. When he appeared before crowds he wore the most
spectacular purple robes. He would be upstaged by no one. He was notori­
ously van about his appearance-it was said that one reason he enjoyed
being honored by the Senate and people was that on these occasions he
coud wear a laurel wreath, hiding his baldness. Caesa was a masterfl or­
ator. He knew how to say a lot by saying a little, intuited the moment to
end a speech for maximum effect. He never failed to incorporate a surprise
into   his   public   appearances-a   startling   announcement   that   would
heighten their drama.
Immensely popular among the Roman people, Caesar was hated and
feaed by his rivals. On the ides of Mac-March 15-i the year 44 B.C.,
a group of conspirators led by Brutus and Cassius surrounded hir in the
senate and stabbed hir to death. Even dying, however, he kept his sense of
dra                                                                              a. Drawing the top of his gown over his face, he let go of the cloth's
lower part so that it draped his legs, allowing hir to die covered and de­
cent. According to the Roma historian Suetonius, his final words to his
old fiend Brutus, who was about to deliver a second blow, were in Greek,
and as if rehearsed for the end of a play: "You too, my child?"
Interpretation
The  Roman  theater was  an  event for the  masses,  attended by crowds
unimaginable  today.  Paced  into  enormous  auditoriums,  the  audience
would be amused by raucous comedy or moved by high tagedy. Theater
seemed to contain the essence of life, in its concentated, dramatic form.
Le a religious ritual, it had a powerfl,  instant appeal to the common
man.
Julius Caesar was perhaps the first public figure to understand the vital
lin between power and theater. This was because of his own obsessive in­
terest in drama. He sublimated this interest by making bimself an actor and
diector on the world stage . He said his lines as if they had been scripted;
he gestured ad moved through a crowd with a constant sense of how he
appeared  to  his  audience.  He  incorporated surprise into  his repertoire,
building drama into bis speeches, staging into his public appearances. His
gestures were broad enough for the common man to grasp them instatly.
He became immensely popular. .
Caesa set the idea for all leaders and people of power. Like hir, you
must lear to  enlage YOUf actions through dramatic tecniques such as
LAW 25                                                                           198

surprise, suspense, te creation of sympathy, ad symbolic identfication.
Also like hir, you must be constantly aware of your audienceof what
will please them and what will bore them. You must arrage to place your­
self at the center, to command attenton, and never to be upstaged at ay
cost.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In t e  year 1831, a young woman named Aurore Dupin Dudevant lef her
husband and family in the provinces and moved to Paris. She wanted to be
a writer; marriage, she feIt, was worse than prison, for it lef her neither the
time nor the feedom to pursue her passion. In Paris she would establish
her independence and make her living by writing.
Soon after Dudevant arrived in the capital, however, she had to con­
front certain harsh realites. To   have any degree of feedom in Paris you
had to have money. For a woman, money could only come through mar­
riage or prostituton. No woman had ever come close to making a living by
writng. Women wrote as a hobby, supported by their husbands, or by an
inheritance. In fact when Dudevant first showed her writing to an editor,
he told her, "You should mae babies, Madame, not literature."
Clearly Dudevant had come to Paris to attempt the impossible. In the
end, though, she came up with a stategy to do what no woman had ever
done-a strategy to re-create herself completely, forging a public image of
her own making. Women writers before her had been forced into a ready­
made role, that of the second-rate  artst who wrote mostly for other
women. Dudevant decided that if she had to play a role, she would tr the
game around: She would play the part of a man.
In 1832 a publisher accepted Dudevant's first major novel, Indiana.
She had chosen to publish it under a pseudonym, "George Sand," and all
of Paris  assumed this impressive new writer was male. Dudevant had
sometimes wor men's clothes before creatng "George Sand" (she had al­
ways found men's shirts ad riding breeces more comfortable) ; now, as
a public figure, she exaggerated the image. She added long men's coats,
gray hats, heavy boots, and dandyish cravats to her wardrobe. She smoked
cigars and in conversaton expressed herself like a man, unafraid to domi­
nate the conversation or to use a saucy word.
This stange "malelferale" writer fascinated the public. And unlike
other women writers, Sand found herself accepted into the clique of male
artsts. She drank and smoked with them, even carried on aairs with the
most famous artists of EuropeMusset, Liszt, Chopin. It was she who did
the wooing, and also the abandoning-she moved on at her discretion.
Those who knew Sad well understood that her male persona pro­
tected her fom the public's prying eyes. Out in the world, she enjoyed
playing the part to the extreme; in private she remained herself. She also
realized that the character of "George Sand" could grow stale or pre­
dictable, and to avoid this she would every now and then dramatically alter
194                                                                               LAW 25

te character she had created; instead of conducting affairs with famous
men, she would begin meddling in politics, Ieading demonstrations, inspir­
ing student rebellions. No one would dictate to her the limits of the charac­
ter she had created. Long after she died, ad aer most people had stopped
reading her noveIs, the Iarger-tha-life theaticality of that caracter has
eontnued to fascinate and inspire.
Interpretation
Throughout Sand's public life, acquaintances and other artists who spent
tme in her company had the feeling they were in the presence of a man.
But in her jouras ad to her dosest friends, suc as Gustave Flaubert, she
eonfessed that she had no desire to be a man, but was playing a pat for
public consumption.                                                              Wat she really wanted was the power to determine
her own character. She refused the limits her society would have set on her.
She did not attain her power, however, by being herself; instead she cre­
ated a persona that she could constantly adapt to her own desires, a per­
sona that attacted attenton and gave her presence.
Understad this: The world wants to assign you a role in life. And
onee you accept that role you are doomed. Your power is lirted to the
tny amount allotted to the role you have selected or have been forced to
assure. An actor, on the other hand, plays many roles. Enjoy that protean
power, and if it is beyond you, at least forge a new identity, one of YOUf
ow making, one that has had no boundaies assigned to it by an envious
ad resentl world. This act of defiance is Promethea: It makes you re­
sponsible for your own creation.
Your new identty will protect you fom the world precisely because it
is not "you"; it is a costume you put on and take off. You need not take it
personally. And your new identity sets you apart, gives you theatrical pres­
ence. Those in the back rows can see you and hear you. Those in the front
rows marvel at your audacity.
Do not people talk in society of a man being a great actor? The do not mean by
that that hefeets, but that he excels in simulating, though hefeets nothing.
Denis Didert, 1 713-1 784
KEYS TO POWER
Te character you seem to have been bor with is not necessarily who you
ae; beyond the characteristics you have inherited, YOUf parents, your
fiends,  and your peers have helped to  shape your personality.  The
Pomethean task of the powerfl is to take control of the process, to stop al­
lowng others that ability to limit ad mold them. Remake YOUfself into a
eharacter of power. Working on yourself like day should be one of YOUf
geatest and most pleasurable Iife tasks. It makes you in essence an artst­
a artst creating YOUfself.
In fact, the idea of self-creaton comes from the world of art. For thou-
LAW 2 5                                                                          1 95

sands of years, only kings and the highest courters had the freedom to
shape their public image and determine their own identty. Similarly, only
kings and the wealthiest lords could contemplate teir own image in a
ad consciously alter it. The rest of mankind played the limited role that
society demanded of them, ad had little self-consciousness.
A shift in this condition can be detected in Veläzquez's paintng La
Menina, made in 1656. The artist appears at the left of the canvas, standing
before a painting that he is in the process of creating, but that has its bac
to us-we cannot see it. Beside hir stads a princess, her attendants, ad
one of the court dwarves, all watcing hir work. The people posing for the
painting are not directly visible, but we can see them in tny reflections in a
mirror on the back wall-the king and queen of Spain, who must be sittng
somewhere in the foreground, outside the picture.
The painting represents a dramatc chage in the dynamics of power
and the ability to determine one's own positon in society. For Veläzquez,
the artist, is far more prominently positioned than the king and queen. In a
sense he is more powerfl than they are, since he is clealy the one control­
ling the image-their image. Veläzquez no longer saw hirself as the slav­
ish, dependent artist. He had remade hirself into a man of power. And
indeed the first people other tha aristocrats to play openly with their
image in Wester society were artsts and writers, and later on dandies and
bohemians. Today the concept of self-creation has slowly filtered down to
the rest of society, and has become an ideal to aspire to. Like Veläzquez,
you must demand for yourself the power to determine your position in the
painting, and to create your own image.
The first step in the process of self-creaton is self-consciousness­
being aware of yourself as an actor and taking control of your appearance
and emotions. As Diderot said, the bad actor is the one who is always sin­
cere. People who wear their hearts on their sleeves out in society are tre­
some and embarrassing. Their sincerity notwithstanding, it is hard to take
them seriously. Those who cry in public may temporarily elicit sympathy,
but   sympathy   soon   turs   to   scor   ad   irritaton   at   their   self­
obsessiveness-they are crying to get attention, we feel, and a malicious
part of us wants to deny them the satisfaction.
Good actors control themselves better. They can ply sincere and
heartfelt, can affect a tear and a compassionate look at will, but they don't
have to feel it. They externalize emotion in a form that others can under­
stand. Metod actng is fata in the real world. No mler or leader could
possibly play the part if all of the emotons he showed had to be real. S
leam self-contol. Adopt the plasticity of the actor, who can mold his or her
face to the emoton required.
The second step in the process of self-creation is a variation on the
George Sand stategy: the creation of a memorable character, one that
compels attenton, that stands out above the other players on the stage.
This was the game Abraam Lincoln played. The homespun, common
country man, he knew, was a kind of president that America had never had
196                                                                              LAW 25

but would delight in electing. Although many of these qualities came natu­
raly to hir, he played them up-the hat and clothes, the beard. (No presi­
dent before hir had wor a beard.) Lincoln was also the first president to
use photographs to  spread his image,  helping to create the  icon  of the
"homespun president."
Good drama, however, needs more than an interesting appearance, or
a single stand-out moment. Drama takes place over time-it is an unfold­
ig event. Rhythm and tming ae critical. One of the most important ele­
ments in the rhythm  of drama is suspense. Houdini for instance, could
sometimes complete his escape acts in seconds-but he drew them out to
minutes, to make the audience sweat.
The key to keeping the audience on the edge of their seats is letting
events unfold slowly, then speeding them up at the right moment, accord­
ig to a patter and tempo that you control. Great mlers from Napoleon to
Mao Tse-tung have used theatrical tming to surprise ad divert their pub­
Iic. Franklin Delano Roosevelt understood the importance of staging politi­
ca events in a particular order and rhythm.
At the tme of his 1932 presidential election, the United States was in
te midst of a dire economic crisis. Banks were failing at an alarming rate.
Shortly after winning te electon, Roosevelt went into a kind of retreat.
He said nothing about his plans or his cabinet appointments. He even re­
fsed to meet the sitting president, Herbert Hoover, to discuss the transi­
ton. By the time of Roosevelt's inauguration the country was in a state of
high anxiety.
In his inaugural address, Roosevelt shifted gears. He made a power
speech, maing it clear that he intended to lead the country in a completely
new direction, sweeping away the timid ge stures of his predecessors. From
ten on the pace of his speeches and public decisions-cabinet appoint­
ments, bold legislation-unfolded at an incredibly rapid rate. The period
aer the inauguration became known as the "Hundred Days," and its suc­
cess in altering the country's mood partly stemmed from Roosevelt's clever
pacing and use of dramatic  contrast. He held his  audience in  suspense,
ten hit them with a series of bold ge stures that seemed all the more mo­
mentous because they came from nowhere. You must leam to orchestrate
events in a similar maner, never revealing al your cards at once, but un­
folding them in a way that heightens their dramatc effect.
Besides covering a multitude of sins, good drama ca also confse and
deceive your enemy. During World War II, the German play                      right Bertolt
Brecht worked in Hollywood as a screenwriter. Afer the war he was called
before the House Committee on Un-American Activities for his supposed
Communist  sympathies.  Other  writers  who had  been  called  to  testif
planed to humiliate  the  committee  members with an angry emotional
stand. Brecht was wiser: He would play the committee like a violin, charm­
ing them while fooling them as weIl. He careflly rehearsed his responses,
ad brought along some props, notably a cigar on which he puffed away,
knowing the head of the committee liked cigars. And indeed he proceeded
LAW 25                                                                        197

to beguile the committee with well-crafed responses that were ambiguous,
funny, and double-edged. Instead of an angry, heartfelt tirade, he ran cir­
cles around them with a staged production, and they let hir off scot-free.
Other dra                                                                         atic effects for your repertoire include the beau geste, a
action at a climactic moment that symbolizes your tiumph or your bold­
ness. Caesar's dramatc crossing of the                                            R                                                            bicon was a beau gestea move
that dazzled the soldiers and gave hir heroic proportions. You must also
appreciate the importance of stage entrances and exits. When Cleopatra
first met  Caesa in  Egypt,  she  arrived rolled up  in  a carpet, which  she
arranged to have unfrled at his feet. George Washington twice lef power
with flourish and fanfare (first as a general, then as a president who refsed
to sit for a third term) , showing he knew how to make the moment count,
dramatcally and symbolically.  Your own entrances ad exits  should  be
crated ad planned as careflly.
Remember that overactng can be counterproductive                                  it is another
way  of spending  too  much  effort  tying  to  attract  attention.  The  actor
Richard Burton discovered early in his career that by stading totally stll
onstage, he drew attention to hirself and away from the other actors. It is
less what you do that matters, clealy, than how you do it-your gracefl­
ness ad imposing stllness on the sodal stage count for more than overdo­
ing your part and moving around too much.
Finally:  Lea                                                                     to  play many roles, to be whatever the  moment re­
quires. Adapt your mask to the situaton-be protean in te faces you wear.
Bismarck played this ga                                                           e to perfecton: To    a liberal he was a liberal, to a
hawk he was  a hawk.  He  could  not be  grasped,  and what cannot be
grasped canot be consumed.
1                                                                                 m   a   g   e
The  Creek Sea-God  Proteus.
His  power  came from his ability tb
change  shape  at will, to be whatever the
moment required.  When  Menelaus,  brother
of  Agamemnon,  tried  to  seize  hir,  Proteus
transformed hirself into a lion, then a serpent, a
panther, a boar, running water, and finally a leafy tree.
Authority:  Know how to  be all things to  all men. A discreet Proteus-a
scholar among scholas, a saint among saints. That is the art of winning over
everyone, far like attacts like. Take note of temperaments and adapt your­
self to  that of each person you meet-follow the  lead of the serious ad
jovial in tur, changing your mood discreetly. (Baltasar Craciän, 1601- 1658)
198                                                                               LAW 25

REVERSAL
Tere can really be no reversal to this critical law: Bad theater is bad the­
aer. Even appearing natural requires art-in other words, acting. Ba act­
ig only  creates  embarrassment.  Of  course  you  should  not  be  too
daatc-avoid the histrionic gesture. But that is simply bad theater any­
way, since it violates centuries-old dramatic laws against overacting. In
essence there is no reversal to this law.
LAW 25                                                                         199

LAW
26
KEEP YOUR RANDS CLEAN
JUDGMENT
You must seem a pargon of   civility and ecienc:
Your hands are  never soild by  mistakes and nasty
deeds. Maintain such a spotless appearance by using
others  as scapegoats and cat '-aws to disguise your
involvement.
200

PART I: CONCEAL YOUR MISTAKES-
HAVE A S CAPE GOAT ARO UND TO TAKE THE B LAME
Dur good name and reutation deend more on what we conceal than on
what we reveal. Everyone makes mistakes, but those who are truly clever
manage to hide them, and to make sure someone else is blamed. A conve­
nient scapegoat should always be ket arundjor such moments.
CIEL\l n'STlCE
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
Nea the end of the second century A.D., as China's mighty Han Empire               A great calamity befell
the town of ehelm one
slowly collapsed, the great general and imperial minister Ts'ao Ts'ao
day. The town cobbler
emerged as the most power man in the county. Seeking to extend his
murdered one ofhis
power base ad to rid hirself of the last of his rivas, Ts'ao Ts'ao bega a          customers. So he was
capaign to take control of the stategically vital Central Plain. During the        brought before the
judge, who sentenced
siege of a key city, he slightly miscalculated the tming for supplies of grain
him to die by hanging.
to arrive from the capital. As he waited for the shipment to come in, the
When the verdict was
ary ran low on food, and Ts'ao Ts'ao was forced to order the chief of              read a townsman arose
commissariat to reduce its rations.                                                and cried out, "Ifyour
Honor pleases-you
Ts'ao Ts'ao kept a tight rein on the army, and ran a network of inform­
have sentenced to death
ers. His spies soon reported that the men were complaining, gmbling
the town cobbler! He :5
tt he was living weIl while they themselves had barely enough to eat.              the only one we've got.
Perhaps Ts'ao Ts'ao was keeping the food for hirself, they murmured. If            If you hang him who
will mend our shoes?"
te grumbling spread, Ts'ao Ts'ao could have a mutny on his hands. He
"Who? Who?" cried all
summoned the chief of commissariat to his tent.
the people of ehelm
"I want to ask you to lend me something, and you must not refse,"                  with one voice.
The judge nodded in
Ts'ao Ts'ao told the chief. "What is it?" the chief replied. "I want the loan of
agreement and recon­
your head to show to the troops," said Ts'ao Ts'ao. "But I've done nothing
sidered his verdict.
wong! " cried the chief. "I know," said Ts'ao Ts'ao with a sigh, ;'but if I do                                                       "Good people of
not put you to death, there will be a mutny. Do not grieve-                        fter you're                                       ehe/m," he said, "what
you say is true. Since
gone, I'Il look after your fa                                                      ly." Put this way, the request lef the chief no
we have only one cob­
choice, so he resigned hirself to his fate and was beheaded that very day.
bler it wou/d be a great
Seeing his head on public display, the soldiers stopped grumbling. Sme             wrong against the com­
saw through Ts'ao Ts'ao's gesture, but kept quiet, stunned and intimidated         munity to let him die.
As there are two
by his violence. And most accepted his version of who was to bIare, pre­
roofers in the town let
ferring to believe in his wisdom and faress than in his incompetence and
one ofthem be hanged
cruelty.                                                                           instead. "
A TREASlJRY OF JEWISH
FOLKLORE,
Interpretation
NATHAN AUSlJREL, ED.,
Ts'ao Ts'ao cae to power in an extremely tumultuous time. In the strugle           1948
for supremacy in the crumbling Han Empire, enemies had emerged from
a sides. The battle for the Central Plain had proven more difficult than he
imagined, and money and provisions were a constat concer. No wonder
tat under such stress, he had forgotten to order supplies in time.
Once it became clear that the delay was a critical mistake, ad that the
ay was seething with mutiny, Ts'ao Ts'ao had two options: apology ad
excuses, or a scapegoat. Understanding the workings of power and the im-
LAW 26                                                                             201

portance o f  appeaances as h e  did, Ts'ao Ts'ao did not hesitate for a mo­
ment: He shopped around for the most convenient head and had it served
up immediately.
Occasional   mistakes   are   inevitable-the  world  is  just   too   unpre­
dictable. People of power, however, are undone not by the mistaes they
make, but by the way they deal wit them. Like sUfgeons, they must cut
away the tumor with speed and finality. Excuses and apologies are much
too blunt tools for  trus delicate operaton;  the  powerful avoid them.  By
apologizing you open up  al  sorts of  doubts about yoUf competence, your
intentions, any other mistaes you may not have confessed. Excuses satsf
no one and  apologies  make  everyone  uncomfortable. The mistae  does
not vanish wit an apology; it deepens and festers. Better to cut it off in­
stantly,  distract attention from yourself,  and focus attenton on a conve­
nient scapegoat before people have time to ponder YOUf responsibilit or
YOUf possible incompetence.
I would rather betray the whole world than let the world betry me.
Generl Ts 'ao Ts 'ao, c. A . D .   1 55-220
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
For severa years Cesare Borgia ca                                                paigned to gain control of large parts
of Italy in the name of his fater, Pope  Alexander.  In the yea  1500 he
managed to take Romagna, in northem Italy.  The  region had for yeas
been ruled by a series of greedy masters who had plundered its wealth for
themselves. Without police or  any disciplining force, it  had descended into
lawlessness,  whole  areas  being  ruled  by  robbers  and  feuding  families.
To    establish order, Cesare appointed a lieutenant general of the region­
Remirro  qe  Orco,  "a  cruel  and  vigorous   man,"   according  to  Niccolö
Machiavelli. Cesae gave de Orco absolute powers.
With energy and violence, de Orco established a severe, brutal justce
in Romagna, and soon rid it of almost all of its lawless elements. But in his
zeal he sometmes went too far, and after a couple of years the local popu­
lation resented and even hated hir. In December of 1502, Cesare took de­
cisive action. He first let it be known that he had not approved of de Orco's
cruel and violent deeds, which stemmed from the lieutenant's brutal na­
ture. Then, on December 22, he  imprisoned de  Orco in the town of Ce­
sena, and the day after Christmas the townspeople awoke to find a strange
spectade in the middle of te piazza: de Orco's headless body, dressed in a
lavish suit with a purple cape, the head impaled beside it on a pike, te
bloody knife ad executioner's block laid out beside the head. As Machi­
avelli concluded his comments on te affair, "The ferocity of this scene lef
the people at once stunned and satisfied."
Interpretation
Cesare Borgia was a mater player in the game of power. Always plannig
severa moves  ahead, he set his  opponents the cleverest traps. For tis
Machiavelli honored rum above all others in Te Pince.
202                                                                              LAW 26

Cesare foresaw the fture with amazing claity in Romagna: Only bru­
t justce would bring order to the region. The process would tae several
yeas, and at first the people would welcome it. But it would soon mae
may enemies, and the citizens would come to resent the impositon of
such unforgiving justce, especially by outsiders. Cesare hirself, then,
could not be seen as the agent of this justce-the people's hatred would
cause too many problems in the fture. And so he chose the one man who
could do the dirty work, knowing in advance that once the task was done
he would have to display de Orco's head on a pike. The scapegoat in this
case had been planed from the beginning.
With Ts'ao Ts'ao, the scapegoat was a entrely innocent man; in the
Romagna, he was the offensive weapon in Cesare's arsenal that let hir get
te dirty work done without bloodying his own hands. With this second
kind of scapegoat it is wise to separate yourself from the hatchet man at
some point, either leaving hir dangling in the wind or, like Cesare, even
making yourself the one to bring hir to justce. Not only ae you free of in­
volvement in the problem, you ca appear as the one who cleaned it up.
The A thenians regularly maintained a number of degraded and useless
beings at the public expense; and when any calamity, such as plague,
drought, orfamine, beeil the city . . .  [these scapegoatsl wee led about . . .
and then sacrificed, apparently by being stoned outside the city.
The Colden Bough,  Sir !ames George Frazer  1854-1 941
KEYS TO POWER
The use of scapegoats is as old as civilization itself, and examples of it can
be found in cultures around the world. The main idea behind these sacri­
fices is the shiftng of guilt and sin to an outside figure-object, aimal, or
ma-which is then banished or destroyed. The Hebrews used to take a
live goat (hence the term "scapegoat") upon whose head the priest would
lay both hands while confessing the sins of the Children of Israel. Having
tus had those sins tansferred to it, the beast would be led away and aban­
doned in the wildemess. With the Athenians and the Aztecs, the scapegoat
was human, often a person fed ad raised for the purpose. Since famine
ad plague were thought to be visited on humans by te gods, in punish­
ment for wrongdoing, the people suffered not only fom the famine and
plague themselves but from blame and guilt. They feed themselves of guilt
by trasferring it to an innocent person, whose death was intended to sat­
isf the divine powers and banish the evil from their midst.
It is an extemely human response to not look inward afer a mistake
or crime, but rather to look outward and to af blame ad guilt on a con­
venient object. When the plague was ravaging Thebes, Oedipus looked
everywhere for its cause, everywhere except inside hirself and his own sin
of incest, which had so offended the gods and occasioned the plague. This
profound need to exteriorize one's guilt, to project it on another person or
object, has an immense power, which the clever know how to hamess. Sac-
LAW 26                                                                            203

rifice is a ritual, perhaps the most ancient ritual of a; rita too is a well­
sprig of power. In the killing of de Orco, note Cesae's symbolic and ritu­
alistic display of his body. By faming it in tis dramatc way he focused
guilt outwad. The  citzens of Romagna responded instantly.  Because it
comes so naturally to us to look outward rather than inward, we readily ac­
cept te scapegoat's guilt.
The bloody  sacrice  of the  scapegoat  seems  a barbaic  relic of the
pat, but the practice lives on to this day, i indirectly and symbolically;
since power depends on appearances, and those in power must seem never
to make mistaes, the use of scapegoats is as popular as ever.                   Wat modem
leader  will  take  responsibility  for his blunders?  He  searches out oters
to bla                                                                          e, a scapegoat to  sacrifice.  When  Mao Tse-tung's Cultural  Rev­
oluton faled miserably, he made no apologies or excuses to te Chinese
people; instead, like Ts'ao Ts'ao before hir, he offered up scapegoats, in­
du dng hs own persona secretay and high-ranking memher of the                   P,
eh'en Po-ta.
Franklin D.   Roosevelt had a reputton for honest and f                         aess.
Throughout his career, however, he faced may situations in which being
te nice guy would have  spelled political  disater-yet he  could not be
seen as the agent of any foul play. For twenty years,  ten,  his secretary,
Louis Howe, played the role de Orco had. He handled the backroom deals,
the manipulaton of te press, the underhanded campaign maneuvers. And
whenever a mistae was committed, or a dirty tick contadicting Roo­
sevelt's careflly crafted image became public, Howe served as the scape­
goat, and never complaned.
Besides conveniently shifting biare, a scapegoat can serve as a wam­
ing to oters. I 1631 a plot was hatched to oust France's Cardinal Riche­
lieu fom power, a plot that became known as "The Day of te Dupes." I
almost succeeded, since it involved the upper echelons of govemment, in­
duding  the  queen mother.  But  through  luck  and  his  own  connivances,
Richelieu survived.
One of the key conspirators was a man named Marillac, the keeper of
the seals. Richelieu could not imprison him without implicatng the queen
mother, an extremely dangerous tactic, so he targeted Marillac's broter, a
marshai in te army. This man had no involvement in the plot. Richelieu,
however, afraid that oter conspiracies might be in te air, especially in te
army,  decided to  set a  example.  He  tied te  brother  on trumped-up
charges and had hir executed. In this way he indirecty punished the real
perpetator, who had tought hirsel protected, ad warned any ftue
conspirators that he would not shrink from sacrificing te innocent to pro-
tect his own power.
In fact it is ofen wise to choose the most irocent victim possible as a
sacrificial goat. Such people                                                   w                                                                    not be powerfl enough to fight you, and
their naive protests may be seen as protesting too much-may be seen, in
other words, as a sign of teir guilt. Be carefl, however, not to create a
martyr. It is important that you remain the victm, the poor leader betrayed
204                                                                             LAW 26

by the incompetence of those aound you. If the scapegoat appears too
weak and his punishment too cruel, you may end up the victim of your
ow device. Sometimes you should find a more powerfl scapegoat-one
who will elicit less sympathy in the long run.
In this vein, history has time and again shown the value of using a
elose associate as a scapegoat. This is known as the "fall of the favorite."
Most kings had a personal favorite at court, a man whom they singled out,
sometimes for no apparent reason, and lavished with favors and attention.
But this court favorite could serve as a convenient scapegoat in case of a
treat to the king's reputation. The public would readily believe in the
scapegoat's guilt-why would the king sacrifice his favorite unless he were
guilty? And the other courtiers, resentful of the favorite ayway, would re­
joice at his downfal. The king, meanwhile, would rid hirself of a man who
by that time had probably leaed too much about hir, perhaps becoming
arogant and even disdainful of hir. Choosing a elose associate as a scape­
goat has the same value as the "fal of the favorite." You may lose a fiend
or aide, but in the long-term scheme of things, it is more important to hide
your mistakes than to hold on to someone who one day will probably tr
against you. Besides, you ca always find a new favorite to tae hi  place.
Image: The Innocent Goat. On
the Day of Atonement, the high
priest brings the goat into the
temple, places his hands on its
head, and confesses the peo­
ple's sins, transferring guilt to
te  guiltless  beast,  which  is
then led to the wildemess and
abandoned,  the  people's  sins
and  blame  vanishing  with  hir.
Authority : Folly consists not in committing Folly, but in being
incapable of concealing it. All men make mistakes, but the wise
conceal the blunders tey have made, while fools make them pub­
lic. Reputation depends more on what is hidden than on what is
seen. If you can't be good, be careful. (Baltasar Graciän, 1601-1658)
LAW 26                                                                         20.

PART 11: MAKE USE OF THE CAT'S-PAW
In thefable, the Monke grabs the paw of hisfrend, the Cat, and uses it to
fish chestnuts out of the fire, thus getting the nuts he craves, without hurt­
ing himsel
I there i something unplasant or unpoular that needs to be done,
it is far too risky for you to do the work yoursel. You need a cat 's-aw­
someone who does the dirty, dangerus work for you. The cat 's-aw grabs
what you need, hurts whom you need hurt, and keeps peoplfrom noticing
that you are the one responsibl. Let someone else be the executioner or the
beare of bad news, whil you bring only joy and glad tidings.
rm                                                                               :                                                                           \l   ""LY A\1l               OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
'1'1                                                                             1 1,:  C.\'I'
                                                                                                                                                                                          In 59 B.C., the fture queen Cleopatra of Egypt, then ten years old, wit­
                                                                                                                                                                  A monkey and cat, in    nessed the overthrow and banishment of her father, Ptolemy XII, at the
                                                                                                                                                                  roguery and fun
                                                                                                                                                                                          hand  of  his  eIder daughters-her  own  sisters.  One  of the  daughters,
                                                                                                                                                                  5worn brothers twain,
                                                                                                                                                                  both owned a common     Berenice, emerged as the leader of the rebellion, and to ensure that she
                                                                                                                                                                  master,                 would now rule Egypt alone, she imprisoned her other sisters and mur­
                                                                                                                                                                  Whatever mischief in    dered her own husband. This may have been necessary as a practcal step
                                                                                                                                                                  the house was done
                                                                                                                                                                                          to secure her rule. But that a member of the royal family, a queen no less,
                                                                                                                                                                  By Pug and Tom
                                                                                                                                                                  was contrived each      would so overtly exact such violence on her own family horrified her sub­
                                                                                                                                                                  disaster. . .           jects and stirred up powerfl opposition. Four years later this opposition
One winters day was
was able to retur Ptolemy to power, and he promptly had Berenice and
secn this hopeful pair
the other eIder sisters beheaded.
C!ose to the kÜchen
fire, as usual, posted.                                                          In 51 B.C. Ptolemy died, leaving four remaining children as heirs. As
Amongst the red-hot                                                              was the tradition in Egypt, the eldest son, Ptolemy XIII (only ten at the
("oals the eook with
time), married the eIder sister, Cleopatra (now eighteen), and the couple
eare
took the throne together as king and queen. None of the four children feI
Had plae 'd same nice
plump chestmlls to be                                                            satisfied with this; everyone, including Cleopata, wanted more power. A
roasted,                                                                         struggle emerged between Cleopatra and Ptolemy, each trying to push the
From whence in smokc
other to the side.
a pungent odor rose,
In 48 B.C., with the help of a goverment faction that feared Cleopa­
Whose oily fragrance
struck the monkey S                                                              ta's ambitions, Ptolemy was able to force his sister to flee the country,
nose.                                                                            leaving hirself as sole ruler. In exile, Cleopatra schemed. She wanted to
" Tom!" says sly Pug,
rule alone and to restore Egypt to its past glory, a goal she feIt none of her
"pray could not you
other siblings could achieve; yet as long as they were alive, she could not
and /
Share this dessert the                                                           realizher dream. And the example of Berenice had made it clear that no
eook is pleased to                                                               one would serve a queen who was seen murdering her own kind. Even
cater?
Ptolemy XIII had not dared murder Cleopatra, although he knew she
Had / such claws as
would plot against hir fom abroad.
yours, f'd quickly try:
Lend me a hand   'twill                                                          Within a year ater Cleopatra's baishment, the Roman dictator Julius
be a coup-de-maftre. "                                                           Caesar arrived in Egypt, determined to make the country a Roman colony,
50 said, he seized his
Cleopatra saw her chance: Reentering Egypt in disguise, she traveled hun­
colleagu e s ready paw,
dreds of miles to reach Caesa in Alexandria. Legend has it that she had
Pul/ed out the fruÜ,
206                                                                              LAW 26

herself smuggled into his presence rolled up inside a capet, which was           and crammed it in his
jaw.
graceflly unfrled at his feet, revealing the young queen. Cleopatra imme­
Now came the shining
diately went to work on the Roma. She appeaed to his love of spectacle
Mistress of the fane,
ad his interest in Egyptia history, ad poured on her feminine chams.             And aff in haste the
Casar soon succumbed and restored Cleopatra to the throne.                       two marauders
scampered.
Cleopatra's siblings seethed-she had outmaneuvered them. Ptolemy
Tom for his share of
XIII would  not  wait  to  see  what  happened  next:  From  his  palace  in
the plunder had the
Alexandria, he summoned a great army to march on the city and attack             pain,
Caesa. In response, Caesar immediately put Ptolemy and the rest of the           Whilst Pug his palate
with the dainties
f                                                                                aily under house arrest. But Cleopatra's younger sister Arsinoe escaped
pampered.
fom te palace and placed herself at the head of the approacing Egyptian
FAHLES,
toops, proclaiming herself queen of Egypt. Now Cleopatra finaly saw her                                                                                       JEAN DE LA FONTAINE,
                                                                                 1621                                                                         l695
chance: She convinced Caesar to release Ptolemy from house arest, under
te agreement that he would broker a truce. Of course she knew he would
do te opposite-that he would fight Arsinoe for control of the Egyptian
ay. But this was to Cleopatra's benefit, for it would divide the royal fam­
ily. Better still, it would give Caesar the chance to defeat and kill her sib­
lings in battle.
Reinforced by troops from Rome, Caesar swiftly defeated the rebels.              TlIE CIWI\-I IE". TW:
In  te Egyptians' retreat, Ptolemy drowned in the Nile. Caesar captured          COIlHA. ·1\1) TIIE
1.<KAI.
Arsinoe and had her sent to Rome as a prisoner. He also executed the nu­
merous enemies who had  conspired  against Cleopatra,  and  imprisoned           Once upon a time there
was a crow and his wife
oters who had  opposed  her.  To     reinforce her position  as  uncontested
who had built a nest in
queen, Cleopatra now married the only sibling left, Ptolemy XV-only
a banyan tree. A big
eleven at the time, and the weakest of the lot. Four years later Ptolemy         snake crawled into the
hollow trunk and ate
mysteriously died, of poison.
up the chicks as they
In  41 B.C., Cleopatra employed  on a second Roman  leader,  Marc
were hatched. The crow
Atony, the same tactics she had used so weIl on Julius Caesar. After se­         did not want to move,
ducing hir, she hinted to hir that her sister Arsinoe, still a prisoner in       since he loved the tree
Rome,  had  conspired  to  destroy  hir.  Marc  Antony  believed  her  and       dearly. So he went to
his friend the jackal for
promptly had Arsinoe executed, thereby gettng rid of the last of the sib­
advice. A plan of action
lings who had posed such a threat to Cleopatra.                                  was devised. The crow
and his wife jew abo"t
in implementation.
Interpretation
As the wife  approached
Lgend has it that Cleopatra succeeded through her seductive carms, but
a pond, she saw the
i reality her power came fom an ability to get people to do her bidding          women of the king's
witout realizing they were being manipulated.  Caesar and Antony not             court bathing, with
pearfs, necklaces, gems,
only rid her of her most dangerous siblings-Ptolemy XIII and Arsinoe­
garments, and a gaiden
tey decimated al of her enemies, in both the govemment and the mili­
chain laying on the
t                                                                                .  The two men became her cat's-paws. They entered the fire for her,         share. The crow-hen
did the ugly                                                                     necessary work, while shielding her fom appearing as the                     seized the golden chain
                                                                                                                                                              in her beak and jew
destroyer of                                                                     and fellow Egyptias. And in the end, both men
                                                                                                                                                              toward the banyan tree
                                                                                 acquiesced to her desire to rule Egypt not as a Roman colony but as an in­
                                                                                                                                                              with the eunuchs in
                                                                                 dependent allied kingdom. And they did all this for her without realizing    pursuit. When she
                                                                                 how she had manipulated them. This was persuasion of the subtlest and        reached the tree, she
                                                                                                                                                              dropped the chain into
most powerful kind.
                                                                                                                                                              the hole. As the kings'
                                                                                                                                                              LAW 26                    207

men c!imbed the tree                                                            A queen must never dirty her hands with ugly tasks, nor can a king ap­
for the chain, they saw
pear in public wit blood on his face, Yet power cannot survive without te
the swelling hood of
constant squashing of enemies-there will always be dirt little tasks tat
the cobra. So they
kifled the snake with                                                           have to be done to keep you on the throne, Like Cleopata, you need a
their clubs, retrieved                                                          cat's-paw,
the golden chain, and
This will usually be a person from outside your immediate circle, who
went back to the pond.
will therefore be unlikely to realize how he or she is being used. You will
And the crow ami
his wife  lived happily                                                         fnd these dupes everywhere-people who enjoy doing you favors, espe­
ever after.
cialy if you throw tem a minimal bone or two in exchange. But as they
A TALE FROM T H E
accomplish tasks that may seem to them innocent enough, or at least com­
PANCHATANTRA,
FOURTH CENTURY,                                                                 pletely justfied, they are actually clearing the field for you, spreading the
RETOLD I N
information you feed them, undermining people they do not realize are
THE CRAFT OF POWER,
R. G. H. SIU, 1979                                                              YOUf rivals, inadvertently frthering YOUf cause, dirtying their hands while
yours remain spotless.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 11
In the late 1920s, civil war broke out in China as the Natonalist and Com­
munist parties battled for contol of the county. In 1927 Chiang                 K-shek,
                                                                                11m\' TO                                                                        the Natonalist leader, vowed to kill every last Communist, and over the
Il K O . I I l c ' I ' T                                                        ':\,                                                                            next few years he nearly accomplished his task, pushing his enemies hard
untl, in 1934-1935, he forced tem into the Long March, a six-thousad­
When Omar, son of
al-Khattab, was                                                                 mile retreat fom the southeast to the remote northwest, trough harsh ter­
converted to Islam, he
rain, in which most of their ranks were decimated. In late  1936 Chiag
wanted the news ofhis
planned one last offensive to wipe them out, but he was caught in a mutiny:
conversion to reach
everyone quickly. He                                                            His own soldiers captured hir and tured hir over to the Communists.
went to see lamil, son                                                          Now he could only expect the worst
of Ma'mar al-lumahi.
Meanwhile, however, the Japaese began an invasion of China, ad
The latter was re­
much to Chiang's surprise, instead of killing hir te Communist leader,
nowned for the speed
with which he passed                                                            Mao Tse-tung, proposed a deal: The Communists would let hir go, and
on secrets. If he was                                                           would recognize hir as commander of their forces as weIl as his, if he
told anything in confi­
would agree to fight alongside them against teir common enemy. Chiang
dence, he let everyone
had expected torture and execution; now he could not believe his luck.
know about it immedi-
ately. Omar said to                                                             How sof these Reds had become. Without having to fight a rearguard ac­
hir: "I have hecome a                                                           ton against te Communists, he knew he could beat the Japanese, and
Muslim. Do not say
then a few years down the line he would tur around and destoy the Reds
anything. Keep it dark.
with ease. He had nothing to lose and everything to gain by agreeing to
Do not mention it in
front of anyone. "                                                              their terms.
lamif went out into the                                                         The Communists proceeded to fight the Japanese in their usual fash­
,treet and began ,hout­
ion, with hit-and-run guerrilla tactics, while the Nationalists f<ught a more
ing at the top ofhis
conventional war, Together, afer several years, they succeeded in evictng
voice: "Do you believe
that Omar, son of al­                                                           the Japanese. Now, however, Chiang finally understood what Mao had re­
Khattab, has not                                                                ally planned. His own army had met the brunt of the Japanese artillery,
become a Muslim?
was greatly weaened, and would take a few years to recover. The Com­
Weil, do not believe
munists, meanwhile, had not only avoided any direct hits from the Japa­
that! I am te/ling you
that he has!"                                                                   nese, they had used the time to recoup their strength, and to spread out
208                                                                             LAW 26

ad gain pockets of influence al over China. As soon as the war against the          The news of Omar's
conversion to Islam
Japanese ended, the civil wa started again-but this time te Communists
was spread everywhere.
enveloped the weakened Nationaists and slowly beat them into submis­
And that was just what
sion. The Japanese had served as Mao's cat's-paw, inadvertently ploughing           he intended.
te fields for the Communists and making possible their victory over Chi­            THE SUBTLE RUSE:
THE BOOK OF ARARIC
ag Kai-shek.
WISDOM AND GUILE,
THIRTEENTH CENTURY
Interpretation
Most leaders who had taken as powerfl an enemy as Chiang                            Ki-shek
prisoner would have made sure to kill hir. But in doing so they would
have lost the chace Mao exloited. Without the experienced Chiag as
leader of the Natonalists, the fight to drive the Japanese out might have
lasted much longer, with devastatng results. Mao was far too clever to let
anger spoil the chance to kill to birds with one stone. In essence, Mao             A FOOI. A \ O  \ \X  ISE \IA\
used two cat's-paws to help hir attain total victory. First, he cleverly bated
                                                                                    A wise man,
Chiang into taking charge of the war against the Japanese. Mao knew the             walking alone,
Nationalists led by Chiang would do most of the hard fighting and would             Was being bothered by
a fool throwing stones
succeed in pushing the Japanese out of China, if they did not have to con­
at his head.
cer themselves with fighting the Communists at the same tme. The Na­
Turning to face him,
tonalists, then,  were  the  first  cat's-paw, used to  evict  the Japanese.  But   he said:
Mao aso knew that in the process of leading the war against the invaders,           "My dear chap, weil
thrown!
the Japanese artillery ad air support would decimate the  conventonal
Please accept these
forces  of the  Nationalists,  doing damage it could take  the  Communists
few francs.
decades to inflict. Why waste time and lives if the Japanese could do the           You 've worked hard
job quickly? It was this wise policy of using one cat's-paw after another that      enough to gel more
than mere thanks.
alowed the Communists to prevail.
Every effort deserves
There are two uses of the cat's-paw: to save appearances, as Cleopatra
its reward.
dd, and to save energy and effort. The latter case in particular demands            But see that man over
that you plan several moves in advance, realizing that a temporary move             there? He can afford
More than I can.
backward (letting Chiang go, say) can lead to a giant leap forward. If you
Present him with some
are temporarily weaened and need time to recover, it will ofen serve you
ofyour stones: they'lI
weIl to use those around you both as a screen to hide your intentons and            earn a good wage. "
Lured by the bait,
a a cat's-paw to do your work for you. Look for a powerfl third party who
the stupid man
shaes an enemy with you (if for different reasons) , then take advantage of
Ran offto repeat
their superior power to deal blows which would have cost you much more
the outrage
energy, since you are weaker. You can even gently guide them into hostili­          On the other worthy
ties. Always search out the overly aggressive as potential cat's-paws-they          citizen.
This time he wasn 't
ae often more than willing to get into a fight, and you can choose just the
paid in money
rght fght for your purposes.                                                        for his stones.
Up rushed
serving-men,
And seized him and
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW III
thrashed him and
Kuriyama Daizen was  an  adept o f  Cha-no-yu  (Hot Water for Tea,  the
broke all his bones.
Japanese tea ceremony) ad a student of the teachings of the great tea mas­          In the courts of kings
there are pests like this,
ter  Sen  no  Rikyu.  Around                                                        1620 Daizen  lea                ed  that  a  friend  of  his,
devoid of sense:
Hoshino Soemon, had bOITowed a large sum of money (300 ryo) to help a
They'll make their
LAW 26                                                                              209

master laugh at your                                                            relative who had falen into debt. But although Semon had maaged to
expense.
bail  out  his relatve, he had simply displaced the  burden  onto  hirself.
Ta   si/ence their cackle,
Daizen knew Soemon well-he neither cared nor understood much ab out
should you hand out
rough                                                                           money, and could easily get into trouble through slowness in repaying the
Punishment? Mayhe                                                               loan,  which  had  been made  by  a wealthy  merchat called  Kawachiya
you 're not strong
                                                                                Sanemon. Yet if Daizen offered to  help  Soemon pay back the  loan, he
enough.
Better persuade them                                                            would refuse, out of pride, and might even be offended.
10 attack                                                                       One day Daizen visited his friend, and afer touring the garden and
50mebody else, who                                                              looking at Soemon's prized peonies, they retired to his reception room.
ean more Ihan pay
Here Daizen saw a painting by the master Kano Tennyu. '                         '                                                                              ,'' Daizen ex­
Ihem back.
claimed, "a splendid piece of painting                                          I don't know when I have seen
SELECTED FAHLES,
JEAN DE LA FONTAINE.                                                            anything I like better."                                                       M                                                                              ter several more bouts of praise, Soemon had no
1 621-1 695
choice: "Well," he said, "since you like it so much, I hope you will do me
the favor of accepting it."
At first Daizen refsed, but when Soemon insisted he gave in. The
next day Soemon in tur received a package from Daizen. Inside it was a
beautifl and delicate vase, which Daizen, in an accompanying note, asked
his friend to accept as a token of his appreciation for the painting that Se­
11 1 1-:                                                                        1\1>1.\\ BIBI>                                                                 mon had so graciously given hir the day before. He explained that the
                                                                                                                                                               vase had been made by  Sen no  Rikyu hirself,  and  bore an inscription
A merchant kepl a bird
in a cage. He was going                                                                                                                                        from Emperor Hideyoshi. If Soemon did not care for the vase, Daizen sug­
to India, Ihe land from                                                                                                                                        gested, he might make a gif of it to an adherent of Cha-no-yu-perhaps
which Ihe hird came,
                                                                                                                                                               the merchant Kawachiya Sanemon, who had often expressed a desire to
and asked it whelher he
could hring anything                                                                                                                                           possess it.  "I hear," Daizen continued, "he has a fine piece of fancy paper
hack for it. The hird                                                                                                                                          [the 300-ryo 1.0.U.] which you would much like. It is possible you might
asked for its freedom,                                                                                                                                         arrange an exchange. "
bul was refused. So he
Realizing what his gracious friend was u p  to, Soemon took the vase to
asked the merchant to
the  wealthy  lender.  "However  did  you  get  this,"  exclaimed  Sanemon,
visit a jungle in India
and announce his                                                                when Soemon showed hir the vase. "I have often heard of it, but this is the
captivity 10 the free
first time I have ever seen it. It is suc a treasure that it is never allowed
hirds who were there.
outside the gate ! "  He instantly offered to exchange the debt note for the
The merchanl did so,
and no sooner had he                                                            flower vase, and to give Soemon 300 ryo more on top of it. But Soemon,
spoken when a wild                                                              who  did  not  care  for  money,   only  wated  the  debt  note  back,   and
bird, jusl like his own,
Sanemon gladly gave it to hir.  Then  Soemon  immediately hurried to
fell senseless out ofa
Daizen's house to thank hir for his clever support.
tree on /0 the ground.
The merchant thought
thaI Ihis must he a rela­                                                       Interpretation
live of his own hird,
Kuriyama Dazen understood that the granting of a favor is never simple:
and fell sad Ihal he
If it is done with ' fss and obviousness, its receiver feels burdened by        a
should have caused {his
dealh.                                                                          obligation. This may give the doer a certan power, but it is a power that
When he got home, the                                                           will eventually self-destruct, for it will str up resent                       ent and resistance. A
hirt asked him whether
favor  done  indirectly and elegantly has  ten times more power. Daizen
he had hroughl good
knew a direct approach would only have offended Soemon. By letting his
news from India.
                                                                                "No, " said Ihe                                                                friend give hir  the  paintng, however, he made Soemon feel that he too
                                                                                merchant, " 1 fear thaI                                                        had pleased his friend with a gif. In the end, all three partes emerged from
                                                                                my news is had. One of
                                                                                                                                                               the encounter feeling flfilled in their own way.
210                                                                             LAW 26

In essence,  Daizen made hirself the cat's-paw, the tool to take the             your relations
eollapsed and fell at my
ehestnuts out of the fire. He must have feIt some pain in losing the vase, but
feet when I mentioned
he gained not only the painting but, more important, the power of the
your captivity. ··
eourter. The courtier uses his gloved hand to soften any blows against hir,      As soon as these words
disguise his scars, and mae the act of rescue more elegant and clean. By         were spoken the
merchant"s bird
helping others,  the  courtier eventually helps  hirself.  Daizen's  example
eollapsed and fell to
provides the paradigm for every favor done between fiends and peers:
the bo/tom ofthe eage.
never impose your favors. Search out ways to make yourself the cat's-paw,        " The news of his kins­
indirectly extricatng your fiends fom distress without imposing yourself         man 's death has killed
him. 100, "  thought the
or making them feel obligated to you.
merehant. Sorrowfully
he picked up the bird
One shouZd not be too straightorward. Go and see theforest.                      and pUl it on the
The straight trees are cut down, the crooked ones are Zeft   standing.           windowsill. At onee
the bird revived and
Kautilya, Indian philosopher third century B.r.
flew to a nearby tree.
"Now you know, " the
bird said, "that what
you thought was disas­
KEYS TO POWER
ter was in fact good
As a leader you may imagine that constant diligence, and the appearance
news for me. And how
of working harder than anyone else, signif power. Actually, though, they         the message, the
have the opposite effect: They imply weakness. Why are you working so            suggestion of how to
behave in order to free
hard? Perhaps you are incompetent, and have to put in extra effort just to
myself was transmitted
keep up; perhaps you are one of those people who does not know how to
to me through you, my
delegate, and has to meddle in everything. The truly powernd, on the other       captor. " And he flew
had, seem never to be in a hurry or overburdened. While others work              away, free at last.
teir fingers to the bone, they take their leisure. They know how to find the     [ALES OF TIE
DERVlSHES,
rght people to put in the effort while they save their energy and keep their     IDRIES SHAH, 1967
hads out of the fire. Similarly, you may believe that by taking on the dirty
work yourself, involving yourself directly in unpleasant actions, you im­
pose your power and instll fear. In fact you make yourself look ugly, and
abusive of your high  position.  Truly  power                                    d  people keep  their hands
clean. Only good things surround them, and the only announcements they
make are of glorious achievements.
You will ofen find it necessary, of course, to expend energy, or to ef­
feet an evil but necessary action. But you must never appear to be this ac­
ton's  agent.  Find a cat's-paw.  Develop the arts of finding, using,  and, in
tme, getting rid of these  people when their cat's-paw role has been ful­
filled.
On the eve of an important river battle, the great third-century Chi­
nese strategist Chuko Liang found hirself falsely accused of secretly work­
ing for the other side. As proof of his loyalty, his commander ordered hir
to produce  100,000 arrows for the army within three days,  or be put to
death.  Instead  of tying to  manufacture  the  arrows,  an  impossible  task,
Lang took a dozen boats and had bundles of straw lashed to their sides. In
te late aferoon, when mist aways blanketed the river, he floated the
boats toward the enemy camp. Fearing a trap fom the wily Chuko Liang,
te enemy did not attack the barely visible boats with boats of their own,
LAW 26                                                                           211

but showered tem wit arrows from te bank. As Liang' s boats inced
closer, they redoubled te rain of arrows, whic stuck in the thick staw.
1l\\\J)  ,\:'m B,\TI ISI lr:B,\
After  several hours, te men hiding  on board sailed the vessels quicly
At the turn of the year,
downstream,  where  Chuko  Liag met  tem  and  collected his  100,000
when kings take the
arows.
field, David sent 10ab
out with his other offi­                                                    Chuko Liang would never do work that others could do for                       h                                                                              -he
cers and all the Israelite
was always tinking up tricks like this one. The key to planning suc a
force,I', and they
stategy is te abilit to tink far aead, to imagine ways in whic other
ravaged Ammon and
people can be baited into doing te job for you.
laül siege to Rabbah,
while David remained                                                        A                                                                              essenta element in making ts stategy work is to disguise your
in len/saler. One                                                                                                                                          goal,  shrouding it  in  mystery,  like  the  strange  enemy  boat  appeaing
evening David got up
                                                                                                                                                           dimly in the mist. When your rivas cannot be sure what you are aer, they
from his couch and, as
he walked about on the                                                                                                                                     will react in ways that ofen work aanst them in the long ron. In fact they
roofof the palace, he                                                                                                                                      will become your cat's-paws. I you disguise your intentons, it is muc eas­
saw from there a
ier to guide them into moves tat accomplish exacty what you wat done,
woman bathing and
but prefer not to do yourself. This may require planning several moves i
she was very beautiful.
He sent to inquire who                                                      advace, like a billiard ball tat bounces off te sides a few times before
she was, and the answer                                                     heading into te right pocket.
came, "It must be
The  ealy-twentet-centry  American  con  artist  Yellow  Kid  Weil
Bathsheba, dallghter of
knew that no  matter how skillflly he  homed in  on  the perfect wealthy
Eliam and wife of
Uriah the Hittite, ,                                                        sucker, if he, a stranger, approached this man directy, the sucker might be­
David wrote a letter to                                                     come suspicious. S Weil would find someone the sucker aready knew to
10ab and sent Uriah
serve as a cat's-paw-someone lower on the totem pole who was himself
with it. He wrote in the
an unlikely taget, and would therefore be less suspicious. Weil would in­
letter: "PlIt Uriah
opposite the enemy                                                          terest tis man in a scheme promising incredible wealth. Convinced te
where the fighting is                                                       scheme was for  rea, te cat's-paw would ofen suggest, without promptg,
fiereest and then fall
tat his boss or weaty fiend should get involved: Having more cash t
back, and lcave him to
invest, ts man would increase te size of the pot, making bigger bucs for
meet his death " , ,
'
]oab ' , , stationed                                                        a concemed. The cat's-paw would ten involve te wealty sucer who
Uriah at a point where                                                      had been Weil's target a aong, but who would not suspect a trap, since it
he knew they would
was his trost subordinate who  had roped him in.  Devices like  tis are
put IIp a stOllt fight. The
ofen the best way to approach a person of power: Use an associate or sub­
men ofthe city sallied
out and engaged 10ab,                                                       ordinate to hook you up  wit your  primary target. The  cat's-paw estab­
ami some of David's                                                         lishes your credibility and shields you fom the unsavory appearance of
guards fell; Uriah the
being too pushy in your courtship.
Hittite was also killed,
]oab sent David a                                                           The easiest and most effectve way to use a cat's-paw is often to plant
dispatch with all the                                                       information with him that he  will ten spread to your primary taget. False
news of the battle,                                                         or plan ted informaton is  a powerful tool, especially i spread by a dupe
When Uriah :, wife
whom no one suspects. You will fd it very easy to play innocent ad dis­
heard that her husband
guise yourself a the source.
was dead, she mourned
for him; and when the                                                       The stategic terapist Dr. Milton H. Erickson would often encounter
perio,} ofmourning
among his patients a married couple in which te wife wanted te therapy
was over, David sent
but the husband absolutely refused it. Rather tan wasting energy trying t
for her and brought her
deal wit te man directy, Dr. Erickson would see the wife alone, and a
infO his house, She
became his wife  and                                                        she talked he would interect interpretatons of te husbad's behavior that
bore him a son,
he knew would rile the husband up if he heard tem. Sure enough, te wife
()LD TlSTAMENT.
would tell her husbad what the doctor had sad. After a few weeks te
2 SAMlJEL, 1 1 - 1 2
212                                                                         LAW 26

husband would be so furious he would insist on joining his wife in the ses­
sions so he could set the doctor straight.
Finally, you may well find cases in which deliberately offering yourself
a te cat's-paw will ultmately gain you great power. This is the ruse of the
perfect courter. Its symbol is Sir Walter Raleigh, who once placed his own
cloak on the muddy ground so that Queen Elizabeth would not sully her
shoes. As the instrument that protects a master or peer from unpleasat­
ness or danger, you gain immense respect, which sooner or later will pay
dividends. And remember: If you ca make your assistance subte and gra­
cious rather than boastfl and burdensome, your recompense will be that
much the more satsfing and powerful.
Image:  The Cat's-Paw.
It has long claws to grab
things.   It  is  soft  and
padded. Take hold of the cat
and   use  its  paw  to   pluck
things out of the fire, to claw
your enemy, to play with the
mouse  before  devouring  it.
Sometimes you hurt the
cat,  but  most  often  it
doesn't feel a thing.
Authority :  Do everything pieasant yourself,  everything unpleas­
ant through third parties. By  adopting the first course you win
favor, by taking the second you deflect ill will. Important affairs
often require rewards and punishments. Let only the good come
from you and the evil from others. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601 - 1658)
LAW 26                                                                        213

REVERSAL
The cat's-paw and the scapegoat must be used with exteme cauton and
delicacy. They are like  screens that hide your own involvement in dirty
work from the public; if at ay moment the screen is lifted and you are
seen  as  the  manipulator,  the  puppet master,  the  whole  dynamic  turs
around-your hand will be seen everywhere, and you will be blamed for
misfortunes you may  have  had nothing to do with. Once the  truth is re­
vealed, events will snowball beyond your control.
In 1572, Queen Catherine de' Medicis of France conspired to do away
with Gaspard de Coligny,  a admiral in the  French navy  and a leading
member  of the  Huguenot  (French  Protestant)  community.  Coligny was
elose to Catherine's son, Charles IX, and she feared his growing influence
on the young king. So she arranged for a member of the Guise family, one
of the most power                                                               roya elans in France, to assassinate hir.
Secretly, however, Catherine had another plan: She wanted the Hu­
guenots to blame the Guises for killing one of teir leaders, and to take re­
venge. With one blow, she would erase or injure two threatening rivals,
Coligny  and the  Guise  family.  Yet both plans went awry.  The  assassin
missed  his  target,  only  wounding  Coligny;  knowing  Catherine  as  his
enemy, he strongly suspected it was she who had set up the attac on hir,
and he told the king so. Eventually the failed assassination and the argu­
ments that ensued fom it set off a chain of events that led to a bloody civil
war between Catholics and Potestants, culminating in the harrifing Mas­
sacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve, in which thousands of Potestants were
killed.
If you have to use a cat's-paw or a scapegoat in an action of great con­
sequence, be very carefl: Too much ca go wrong. It is ofen wiser to use
such dupes in more innocent endeavors, where mistakes or miscalculations
will cause no serious harm.
Finally, there are moments when it is advantageous to not disguise
your involvement or responsibilit, but rather to take the blame yourself
far some mistake. If you have power and ae secure in it, you should some­
times play the penitent: With a sorrowful look,  you ask for forgiveness
from those weaker than you. It is the ploy of the king who makes a show of
his own sacrifices far the good of the people. Similarly, upon occasion you
may want to appear as the agent of punishment in order to instll fear and
trembling in your  subordinates. Instead of the cat's-paw you  show  your
own mighty hand as a threatening gesture. Play such a card sparingly. If
you play it too ofen, fea will tur into resent                                  ent and hatred. Before you
know it, such emotions will spark a vigorous opposition that will someday
bring you down. Get in the habit of using a cat's-paw-it is far safer.
214                                                                             LAW 26

LAW
27
PLAY  ON PEOPLE'S NEED
TO BELIEVE TO CREATE A
CULTLIKE F OLLOWING
JUDGMENT
People have an overwhelming desire to believe in some­
thing. Become the Joeal point oJ  such desire by o         Jerng
them a cause, a new Jaith to Jollow. Kee your words
vague butJull oJ promise; emphasize enthusiasm over ra­
tionality and clar thinking. Give your new discipls rit­
uals to perJorm,  ask them to make sacrfices on your
behal. In the absence oJ  organized religon and grand
eauses, your new belii system will bring you untold
power
215

THE SCIENCE OF CHARLATANISM,
OR H OW TO CREATE A CULT IN FIVE EASY STE P S
It was to the charlatan 's
In searching, as you must, for the methods that will gain you the most
advantage that the indi­
viduals predisposed to                                                        power for the least effort, you will find the creation of a cultlike following
credulity should multi­                                                       one of the most effective. Having a large following opens up all sorts of
ply, that the groups of
possibilities for deception; not only will your followers worship you, they
his adherents should
will defend you from your enemies and will voluntarily take on the work of
enlarge to mass
proportions, guarantee­                                                       enticing others to join your fledgling cult. This kind of power will lif you to
ing an ever greater                                                           another realm: You will no longer have to stuggle or use subterfuge to en­
scope for his triumphs.
force your wilL You are adored and ca do no wrong.
And this was in fact to
occur, as science wa.\'                                                       You might think it a gargantua task to create such a following, but in
popularized, from the                                                         fact it is fairly simple. As humans, we have a desperate need to believe in
Renaissance on down                                                           something, anything. This makes us eminently gullible: We simply cannot
through succeeding
endure long periods of doubt, or of the emptiness that comes from a lac of
centuries. With the
something to believe in. Dangle in font of us some new cause, elixir, get­
immense growth of
knowledge and its                                                             rich-quick schere, or the latest technological trend or                           a                                                   movement and
spread through print­
we leap fom the water as one to take the bait. Look at history: The croni­
ing in modern times,
des of the new trends and cults that have made a mass following for them­
the mass ofthe half
educated, the eagerly                                                         selves could fill a library. After a few centuries, a few decades, a few years,
gu/lible prey of the                                                          a few months, they generally look ridiculous, but at the time they seem so
quack, also increased,
attractive, so transcendenta, so divine.
became indeed a
Always in a rush to believe in something, we will maufacture saints
majority; real power
could be based on their                                                       and faiths out of nothing. Do not let tis gullibility go to waste : Mae your­
wishes, opiniom, pref­                                                        self the object of worship. Make people form a cult around you.
erences, and rejections.
The great European chalatans of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen­
The charlatan's empire
turies mastered te                                                            a                                                                                 of cultmaking. They lived, as we do now, in a tme
accordingly widened
with the modern                                                               of transformation: Organized religion was on the wane, seience on the rise.
dissemination of                                                              People were desperate to rally around a new cause or faith. The charlatans
knowledge; since he
had begun by peddling health  elixirs  and  alchemie  shortcuts to wealth.
operated on the basis
Moving  quickly  from  town  to  town,  they  originally  focused  on  smal
of science, however
much he perverted it,                                                         groups-until, by  accident,  they  stumbled  on a truth  of human nature:
producing gold with a                                                         The larger the group they gatered around themselves, the easier it was to
technique borrowed
deceive.
from chemistry and his
The charlatan would station hirself on a high wooden platform (hence
wonderfu/ balsams
with the apparatus of                                                         the term "mountebak") and crowds would swarm around hir. In a group
medicine, he could not                                                        setting, people were more emotional, less able to reason. Had the carlatan
appeal to an entirely
spoken to them individually, they might have found hir ridiculous, but lost
ignorant folk. The i/lit-
in a crowd they got caught up in a communal mood of rapt attention. It be­
erate would be
protected against his                                                         came impossible for them to find the distance to be skeptcaL Any defieien­
absurdities by their                                                          eies in the charlatan's ideas were hidden by the zeal of the mass. Passion
hea/thy common sense.
and entusiasm swept through the crowd like a contagion, and they reacted
His choicest audience
violently to anyone who dared to spread a seed of doubt. Both consciously
would be composed of
the semiliterate, those                                                       studying this  dynamic  over  decades  of experiment  and  spontaneously
who had exchanged                                                             adapting to these situatons as tey happened, the carlatans perfected the
their common sense for
seience of attracting and holding a crowd, molding the crowd into followers
a little distorted infor­
and the followers into a cult.
mation and had
216                                                                           LAW 27

The gimmicks of the charlatans may seem quaint today, but there are               eneountered scienee
and edueation at some
tousands of charlatans among us still, using the sa                               e tied-and-true meth­
time, though briefly
ods their predecessors refined centuries ago, only changing the names of
and unsuecessfully. . .
teir elixirs and moder                                                            zing the look of their cults. We    find these latter­   The great mass of
day   charlatans in all arenas of life-business, fashion, politcs,                a. Many of                                               mankind has always
been predisposed to
tem, perhaps, are following in the charlatan tradition without having any
marvel at mysteries,
knowledge of its history, but you ca be more systematic and deliberate.
and this was especially
Simply follow the five steps of cultmaking that oUf charlatan ancestors per­      true at eertain historie
fected over the years.                                                            periods when the
secure foundations of
life seemed shaken and
Step  1 :  Keep I Vague; Keep It Simple.  To    create a cult you must first
old' values, eeonomie or
attact attention. This you should do not through actons, which are too            spiritual, long aceepted
clear and readable, but through words, which are hazy and deceptive. Your         as certaintie;; eould no
longer be relied upon.
initial speeches, conversatons, and interviews must include to elements :
Then the numbers of
on the one hand the promise of something great and transformative, and
the charlatan 's dupes
on the other a total vagueness. This combination will stmulate all kinds of       multiplied-the "self
hay dreams in your listeners, who will make their own connectons and              killers, " as a seven­
teenth-eentury English­
see what they want to see.
man called them.
To    make your vagueness attractve, use words of great resonance but
THE POWER OF T H E
cloudy meaning, words fll of heat and enthusiasm. Fancy titles for simple         CHARLATAN,
GRETE DE FRANCESCO,
tings are helpfl, as are the use of numbers ad the creation of new words
1 939
for  vague concepts. All of these create the impression of specialized knowl­
edge, giving you a veneer of profndity. By the same token, ty to make the
subject of YOUf cult new and fresh, so that few will understand it. Done right,
te combination of vague promises, cloudy but alluring concepts, and fiery
enthusiasm will stir people's souls and a group will form around you.
Talk too vaguely and you have no credibility. But it is more dangerous            THE O"'L 11'110
WAS CO!)
to be specific. If you explain in detail the benefits people will gain by fol­
Iowing your cult, you will be expected to satisf them.                            Onee upon a starless
midnight there was an
As a corollary to  its  vagueness your appeal should also  be  simple.
owl who sat on the
Most people's problems have complex causes: deep-rooted neurosis, inter­
braneh of an oak tree.
connected social factors, roots that go way back in time and are exceed­          Two ground moles
ingly hard to unravel. Few, however, have the patience to deal with this;         tried to slip quietly by,
unnoticed. "You!" said
most people want to hear that a simple soluton will cure their problems.
the owl. " Who ? " they
The ability to offer this kind of solution will give you great power ad build
quavered, in fear and
you a following. Instead of the complicated explanatons of real life, retur       astonishment, for they
to the primitive solutons of our ancestors, to good old county remedies, to       eould not believe it was
possible for anyone to
mysterious panaceas.
see them in that thick
darkness. " You two!"
Step 2: Emphasize the Visual and the Sensual over the Intellectual.               said the owl. The moles
Once people have begun to gather aound you, two dangers will present              hurried away and told
the other ereatures of
temselves: boredom and skepticism. Boredom will make people go else­
the jeld and forest that
where ; skeptcism will allow them the distance to think rationally about
the owl was the greatest
whatever it is you are offering, blowing away the mist you have artlly cre­       and wisest of all
animals beeause he
ated and revealing your ideas for what they are. You need to                      ause the
could see in the dark
bored, then, and ward off the cynics.
LAW 27                                                                            217

and beeause he eould                                                           The best way to d o  this i s  through theater, or other devices of its kind,
answer any question.
Surround YOUfself wit luxury, dazzle YOUf followers with visual splendor,
''!'ll see about that, "
fill their eyes with spectacle. Not only will this keep tem from seeing te
said a seeretary bird,
and he called on the                                                           ridiculousness of YOUf ideas, te holes in YOUf belief system, it                w                                                                                  also at­
owl one night when it                                                          tract more attenton, more followers. Appea to al the senses: Use incense
was aga in very dark.
for scent, soothing music for heaing, colorful cats and graphs for te
"How many claws am I
eye. You might even tckle te mind, perhaps by using new tecnologica
holding up?" said the
secretary bird. " Two, "                                                                                                                                       gadgets to give YOUf cult a pseudo-scientfic veneer-as long as you do not
said the owl, and that                                                         make anyone really                                                              t. Use te exotic-distant cultures, strange cus­
was right. "Can you
toms-to create teatical effects, and to make the most banal ad ordina
give me another
afars seem signs of something extraordinary.
expression for 'that is
to say ' or 'namely ? ' "
asked the secretary
Step  3:  Borrow  the  Forms  of Organized Religion to  Structure  the
bird. " To wit, " said the
Group.  YOUf cultlike following is growig; it is time to organize it. Find a
owl. "Why does a lover
eall on his love? " asked                                                      way both elevating and comforting. Organized religions have long held un­
the secretary bird. " To                                                       questioned autority for lage numbers of people, ad contnue to do so in
woo," said the owl.                                                            OUf supposedly secular age. And even i the religion itself has faded some,
The secretary bird
                                                                               its forms still resonate with power. The loft and holy associations of orga­
hastened baek to the
other creatures and                                                            nized religion can be endlessly exploited. Create rituals for YOUf followers;
reported that the owl                                                          organize them into a hierarchy, ranking them in grades of sanctit, and giv­
was indeed the greatest
ing tem names and titles that resound with religious overtones; ask them
and wisest animal in
for sacrifices tat will fill YOUf coffers ad increase your power. To empha­
the world becallse he
could see in the dark                                                          size YOUf gathering's quasi-religious nature,                                   t                                                                                  and act like a prophet. You
and because he cOlld                                                                                                                                           ae not a dictator, after all; you are a priest, a guru, a sage, a shaman, or any
answer any luestion.
other word tat hides YOUf rea power in te mist of religion.
"Can /ze sec in the
daytime, too ? "  asked a
red fox. " Yes, " echoed a                                                     Step 4: Disgise Your Source of Income. YOUf group has grown, and you
dormouse and a                                                                 have stctured it in a chUfchHke form. YoUf coffers are beg                      g to f
French poodle. "Can he
with your folowers' money. Yet you must never be seen as hungry for
see in the daytime,
money ad the power it brings. It is at this moment that you must disguise
too? " All the other
creatures laughed                                                              te SOUfce of your icome.
loudly at this silly lues­                                                     Your followers wat to believe that i they follow you al sorts of good
tion, and they set upon
things                                                                         w                                                                               fall into their lap. By surrounding YOUfself with luxury you be­
the red fox and his
come living proof of te soundness of YOUf belief system. Never reveal tht
friends and drove them
out ofthe region. Then                                                         your weat actually comes fom your followers' pockets; instead, mae it
they sent a messen ger                                                         seem to come fom the trut of YOUf methods. Followers                            w                                                                                  copy YOUf
to the owl and asked
each and every move in te belief tat it will bring tem te same results,
him to be their leader.
and teir imitative enthusiasm will blind tem to the carlatan nature of
When the owl appeared
among the animals it                                                           YOUf wealth.
was high noon and the
sun was shining
                                                                               Step  5:  Set Up                                                                a                                                                                  Us-Versus-T                   em Dyna                                                                     ic.  The group is now large
brightly. He walked
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ad triving, a magnet attacting more ad more pacles. If you are not
very slowly, which gave
him an appearance of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            caefl, tough, inertia will set in, and time and boredom will demagnetize
great dignity, ami he                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           te group. To   keep YOUf followers united, you must now do what all reli­
peered about him with
gions and belief systems have done: create an us-versus-them dynamic.
large, staring eye,\;
First, mae sure YOUf followers believe they ae pat of a exclusive
which gave him an air
218                                                                            LAW 2 7

cub, unified by a bond of common goals. Then, to stengthen this bond,               of tremenduus impor­
tance. " He 's Gadl"
maufacture the notion of a devious enemy out to ruin you. There is a
screamed a Plymuuth
force of nonbelievers that will do anything to stop you. Any outsider who
Ruck hen. And the
tes to reveal the charlatan nature of your belief system ca now be de­              uthers tuuk up the cry
scribed as a member of this devious force.                                          "He 's Godl" So they
                                                                                    fullowed him wherever
If you have no  enemies,  invent  one.  Given  a  straw man to  react
                                                                                    he went and when he
aginst, your followers will tghten and cohere. They have your cause to              began ta bump into
believe in and infidels to destroy.                                                 things they began to
bump info things, too.
Finally he came to a
concrete highway and
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
he started up the
middle of it and all the
other creatures
Observance I
followed him. Presently
In te yea  1653, a twenty-seven-year-old Mila man named Francesco
a hawk, who was acting
Giuseppe Borri claimed to have had a vision. He went around town telling            as outrider, observed a
one and all  that  the  achangel  Michael  had  appeared  to  hir  ad  an­          truck caming toward
them at fifty mi/es an
nounced that he had been chosen to be the capitano generale of the Army
hour, and he reported
of te  New  Pope,  an  army  that  would  seize  ad  revitalize  the  world.
to the secretary bird
The archangel had frther revealed that Borri now had the power to see               and the secretary bird
people's souls, and that he would soon discover the philosopher's stone-a           reported to the owl.
" There's danger
long-sought-after   substance   that   could   change  base  metals  into   gold.
ahead, " said the secre­
Friends and acquaintances who heard Borri explain the vision, ad who
tary bird. " To wit? "
wtessed the change that had come over hir, were impressed, for Borri                said the awl. The secre­
had previously devoted hirself to a life of wine, women, and gambling.              tary bird told him.
"A ren't you afraid? "
Now he gave all that up, plunging hirself into the study of alchemy ad
He asked. " Who? " said
tking only of mysticism and the occult.
the owl calmly. for he
The transformaton was so sudden and miraculous, and Borri's words                   could not see the truck.
were so filled with enthusiasm, that he began to create a following. Unfor­         " He 's Godl" cried all
the creatures again. and
tnately the Italian Inquisiton began to notice hir as well-they pro se­
they were still crying
cuted  anyone who delved into the occult-so he lef Italy ad began to
"He's Godl" when the
wader Europe, fom Austia to Holland, telling one and all that "to those             truck hit them and ran
who follow me all joy shall be grahted." Wherever Borri stayed he  at­              them down. Some of
the animals were
tacted followers. His method was simple: He spoke of his vision, which
merely injured. but
had grown more and more elaborate, and offered to "look into" the soul of
most ofthem, including
ayone who believed hir (and they were may) . Seemingly in a trace, he               the owl. were killed.
would stare at this new follower for  several minutes, then claim to have           Moral: You can faol tao
many ofthe people tao
seen the person's soul, degree of enlightenment, and potential for spiritual
much ofthe time.
geatess. If what he saw showed promise, he would add the person to his
[HE T H U R B E R
growing order of disciples, an honor indeed.                                        CARNIVAL,
JAMES THURBER ,
The cult had six degrees, into whic the disciples were assigned ac­
1 894-1 961
cording to what Borri had glimpsed in their souls. With work and total de­
voton to the cult they could graduate to a higher degree. Borri-whom
tey  called "His Excellency," and "Universal Doctor"-demanded from
tem the  strictest vows of poverty. All the goods and moneys they pos­
sessed had to be tumed over to hir. But they did not mind handing over
teir property, for Borri had told them, "I shall soon bring my chemical
LAW 27                                                                              219

studies to a happy conclusion by the discovery of the philosopher's stone,
and by this means we shall all have as much gold as we desire."
To   become the FJUnder
Given his growing wealt, Borri began to change his stle of living.
of a new religion one
must be psychologi­                                                            Renting the most splendid apartment in the city into which he had tem­
eally infallible in one's                                                      porarily settled, he would frish it with fabulous furiture and accessories,
knowledge of a eertain
which he had begun to collect. He would drive through the city in a coach
average type of souls
studded with jewels, with six magnificent black horses at its head. He never
who have not yet
recognized that they                                                           stayed too long in one place, and when he disappeared, saying he had
belong together.                                                               more souls to gather into his flock, his reputation only grew in his absence.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,
He became famous, although in fact he had never done a single concrete
1 144-1900
thing.
From all over Europe, the blind, the crippled, and te desperate came
to visit Borri, for word had spread that he had healing powers. He aked no
fee for his services, which only made hir seem more marvelous, and in­
deed some clamed that in this or that city he had performed a miracle
eure. By only hintng at his accomplishments, he encouaged people's
Men are so simple of
imaginations to blow them up to fatastc proportons. His wealt, for ex­
mind, ami so much
ample, actualy came from the vast sums he was collecting fom his in­
dominated by their
immediate needs, that a                                                        creasingly select group of rich disciples; yet it was presumed that he had in
deeeitful man will                                                             fact perfected the philosopher's stone. The Chuc contnued t pursue
always find plenty who
hir, denouncing hir for heresy and witchcraf, ad Borri's response to
are ready to be
these charges was a dignified silence; this only enhanced his reputaton and
deceived.
made his followers more passionate. Only te great ae persecuted, aer
NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI,
1 469- 1 527                                                                   all; how many understood Jesus Christ in his own time? Borri did not have
to say a word-his followers now caled te Pope the Antichrist.
And so Borri's power grew and grew, until one day he left the cit of
Amsterdam (where he had settled for a while), absconding with huge sums
of bOITowed money and diamonds that had been entrusted to hir. (He
claimed to be able to remove te flaws fom diamonds through the power
of his gifed mind.) Now he was on the run. The Inquisiton eventually
TIIE TF\II'LE
01 I I F. \ l T I i                                                            caught up wit him, and for te last twent years of his life he was impris­
                                                                               oned in Rome. But so great was te belief in his occult powers tat to his
[ln the late 1 7S0sj the
Scottish quaek .fames                                                          dying day he was visited by wealthy believers, including Queen Christina
Graham . . . was                                                               of Sweden. Supplying hir with money and materials, tese visitors al­
winning a large follow­
lowed hir to continue his seach for the elusive philosopher's stone.
ing ami great riches in
Interpretation
London                                                                         [Grahamj
maintained a show of                                                           Before he formed his cult, Borri seems to have stumbled on a critical dis­
great scientifie tech­                                                         covery. Tiring of his life of debauchery, he had decided to give it up and to
nique. In I 772 . . . he
devote hirself to the occult, a genuine interest of his. He must have no­
had visited Philadel-
ticed, however, that when he alluded to a mystcal experience (rather than
phia, where he met
Benjamin Franklin ami                                                          physical exhauston) as the source of his conversion, people of all classes
became interested in                                                           wanted to hear more. Realizing te power he could gain by ascribing te
the latter'.I· experiments
chage to something extera and mysterious, he went frther wit his
with electrieity. These
manufactured visions. The grander the vision, ad te more sacrifices he
appear to have inspired
                                                                               the apparatus in the                                                            asked for, te more appealing and believable his story seemed to become.
                                                                               " Temple of Health, "
                                                                                                                                                               Remember: People are not interested in te truth about cage. They
220                                                                            LAW 27

do not want to hear that it has come from hard work, or fom anyting as        the fabulous establish­
ment he opened in
banal as exhaustion, boredom, or depression; they are dying to believe in
London for the sale of
sorething romantc, oterworldly. They want to hea of angels and out-of­
                                                                              his elixirs                        In the
body experiences. Indulge them. Hint at the mystical source of some per­      chief room
. where he
sona change, wrap it in ethereal colors, and a cultlike following will form   received patients, stood
"the largest air pump
aound you. Adapt to people's needs: The messia must mirror the desires
in the world" 10 assist
ofhis followers. And always aim high. The bigger and bolder your illusion,
him in his "philosophi­
te better.                                                                    cal investigations" into
disease, ami also a
"stupendous metallic
Observance 11
conductor " a richly
In the mid- 1700s, word spread in Europe's fashionable societ of a Swiss
gilded pedestal
eountry doctor named Michael Schüppach who practiced a different kind         surrounded with retorts
and vials of "etherial
of redicine: He used the healing powers of nature t perform miraculous
and other essences. "
eures. Soon well-to-do people fom all over the Contnent, their alments
. . . Aecording to 1
both serious and mild, were making the trek to the alpine village of Lang­    Ennemoser, who
nau, where Schüppach lived and worked. Trudging through the mountains,        published a history of
tese visitors witnessed the most dramatc natural landscapes that Europe       magie in 1 844 at
                                                                              Leipzig, Graham 's
has to offer. By the time they reached                                        Lgnau, they were already feeling
                                                                              "house . . . united the
tansformed and on their way to health.                                        useful with the pleasur­
Schüppach, who had become known as simply the "Mountan Doc­                   able. Everywhere the
utmost magnifieence
tor," had a small pharmacy in town. This place became quite a scene:
was displayed. Even in
Crowds of people fom many different counties would cram the small
the outer court, averred
roor, its walls lined with colorfl bottles filled with herbal eures. Where    an eye-witness, it
most doctors of the tme prescribed foul-tasting concoctons that bore in­      seemed as though art.
invention, and riches
corprehensible Latin ttles (as medicines ofen do stll), Shüppach's eures
had been exhausted.
had names such as "The Oil of Joy," "Litte Flower's Heart," or ''gainst
On the side walls in the
te Monster," and they tasted sweet ad pleasing.                               chambers an are­
Visitors t Lngnau would have to wait patently for a visit with the            shaped glow was
provided by artificial
Mountain Doctor, because every day some eighty messengers would arrive
electrie light; star rays
at the pharmacy bearing flasks of urine from al over Europe. Schüppach
darted forth; transpar­
claimed he could diagnose what ailed you simply by looking at a sampie of     ent glasses of all ('olors
your urine and reading a written descripton of your alment. (Naturally he     were plaeed with clever
seleetion and much
read the descripton very careflly before prescribing a eure.) When he fi­
taste. All this, the same
naly had a spare minute (the urine sampies took up muc of his tme), he
eyewitness assures us,
would call the visitor into his office i te phamacy. He would ten exam­       was ravishing and
ine this person's urine sampie, explaining that its appearace would tell      exalted the imagination
to the highest degree. "
hir everything he needed to know. County people had a sense for these
Visitors were given a
tings, he would say-their wisdom came fom living a simple, godly life
printed sheet of rules
wth none of the complications of urba living. This personal consultaton       for healthy living. In
would also include a discussion as to how one might bring one's soul more     the Great Apollo
Apartment they might
into harmony with nature.
join in mysterious ritu­
Schüppach had devised many forms of treatment, eac profoundly un­
als, aceompanied by
lie the usual medica practices of te time. He was a believer, for instace,    ehants: "Hai/, Vital Air,
aethereal! Magnetic
i electic shock therapy. To those who wondered whether this was in
Magie. hait!" Ami
keeping with his belief in the healing power of natre, he would explain
whi/e they hai/ed the
tat electicity is a natural phenomenon; he was merely imitating te
LAW 27                                                                        221

maKie vf magnetism,                                                                 power o f  lightning. One o f  his patients claimed to b e  inhabited b y  seven
the windows were
devils. The doctor cured hir with electrical shocks, and as he administered
darkened, revealing a
these he exclaimed that he could  see  the devils flying out of the man's
eeiling studded with
electrie stars ami a                                                                body, one by one. Another man claimed to have swallowed a hay wagon
yvunK and love!y                                                                    and its  driver, whieh  were  causing hir  massive pains in the  ehest. The
"Rosy Goddess of
Mountain Doctor listened patently, claimed to be able to hear the crack of
Health " in a niehe
a whip in the man's belly, promised to eure hir, and gave hir a sedative
E very evening this
Temple ofHealth was                                                                                                                                                    and a purgative. The man fell asleep on a ehair outside the pharmacy. As
emwded with guests; it                                                                                                                                                 so on as he awoke he vomited, and as he vomited a hay wagon sped past
had hecome the fashion
                                                                                                                                                                       hir (the Mountan Doctor had hired it for the occasion), the crack of its
to visit il and try the
Kreat twelve-foot hed of                                                                                                                                               whip making hir feel that somehow he had indeed expelled it under the
state, the " Grand Celes­                                                           doctor's care.
tial Bed, " said to eure                                                            Over the years, the Mountain Doctor's f                                            ae grew. He was consulted
any disease. .   . This
                                                                                                                                                                       by the powerfl-even the writer Goethe made the tek to his village-and
bed, aeeording to
Ennemvser, "s!vod in a                                                              he beca                                                                            e the center of a cult of nature in whieh everything natural was
splendid rvom, infO                                                                                                                                                    considered worthy of worship. Sehüppaeh was carefl to create effects that
wh ich a cylinder led
would entertain and inspire his patients. A professor who visited hir once
from an adjoining
wrote, "One stands or sits in company, one plays cards, sometmes with a
chamher tv conduct Ihe
heating currents . . . at                                                           young woma; now a concert is given, now a lune or supper, ad now a
the same time alt sorls                                                             little balet is presented. With a very happy effect, the freedom of nature is
of pleasing scenls of
everywhere united with the pleasures of the beau monde, and if the doctor
strenKlhening herhs
is not able to heal any diseases, he ca at least eure hypoehondria and the
and Oriental incense
were alsv hrought in                                                                vapors."
through glass tubes.                                                                Interpretation
The heavenly hed ilself
Schüppach had begun his career as an ordinary village doctor. He would
res ted upon "ix solid
sometmes use in his practice some of the village remedies he had grown
transparent pi/lars; Ihe
bedclolhes were of                                                                  up with, and apparently he notced some results, for soon these herbal tinc­
purpie and sky-hlue                                                                 tures and natural forms ofhealing became his speciaty. And in fact his nat­
Atlas silk, spread over
ural   form  of  healing  did   have   profound  psyehological  effects   on  his
a mallress saturaled
patents. Where the normal drugs of the time created fear ad pan, Schüp­
with A rahian perfumed
waters to sui! the tastes                                                           pach's treatments were comfortable and soothing. The resulting improve­
of the Persian cvurt.                                                               ment in the patient's mood was a critca element in the eures he brought
The chamher in which
about. His patients believed so  deeply in his skills that they willed them­
it was placed he calted
selves into  health. Instead of scoffing at their  irrational explanations for
the Sanetum Sancto­
rum                                                                                 Tv   add to alt                                                                    their ailments, Schüppach used their hypochondria to  mae it  seem that he
this; there were the                                                                                                                                                   had effected a great eure.
melodious notes of the
The case of te Mountain Doctor teaches us valuable lessons in the
harmonica, softflutes,
creation of a cultlike following. First, you must find a way to engage peo­
agreeahle voices, and a
great organ. "                                                                      ple's will,  to make their belief in your powers  stong enough  tat they
THE POWER OF THE                                                                    imagine all sorts of benefits. Their belief will have  a self-flfilling quality,
CHARLATAN,
but you must make  sure that it is you, rather than their own will, who is
GRETE DE FRANCESCO,
1 939                                                                               seen as the agent of tansformation. Find  the belief, cause, or fatasy that
will mae them believe with a passion ad they will imagine the rest, wor­
shipping you as healer, prophet, genius, whatever you like.
Second, Schüppach teaches us the everlasting power of belief in na­
ture, and in simplicity. Nature, in reaity, is fll of much that is terrifing­
poisonous plants, fierce animals, sudden disasters, plagues. Belief in the
222                                                                                 LAW 2 7

healing, comforting quality of nature is realy a constructed myth, a roman­
tcism. But the appeal to nature can bring you great power, especially in
T/ / L  I'()\\  /,:11                                                             <                           ,\  I . W
corplicated and stessfl times.
In the town of
This appeal, however, must be handled right. Devise a kind of theater
Tarnopol lived a man
of nature in which you, as the director, pick and choose the qualites that fit
by Ihe name of Reb
te romanticism of the times. The Mountain Doctor played the part to per­          Feivel. One day, as he
fection, playing up his homespun wisdom and wit, and staging his eures as         sat in his house deeply
absorbed in his
draratic pieces. He did  not  make hirself one  with  nature ;  instead  he
Talmud, he heard a
molded nature into a cult, an artificial construction. To    create a "natural"
loud noise outside,
effect you actualy have to work hard, making nature theatrical and de­            When he went 10 the
lightflly paga.  Otherwise  no one will notice.  Nature  too  must follow         window he saw a lot of
fittle pranksters, " Up to
tends and be progressive.
same new piece of
mischief: no doubt, " he
Observance 1 1 1                                                                  thoughl,
In 1788, at the age o f  fifty-five, the doctor and scientist Franz Mesmer was    "Children, run quiekly
10 the synagogue, " he
at a crossroads. He was a pioneer in the study of anima magnetism-the
eried, leaning out and
belief that animas contain magnetic matter, and that a doctor or specialist
improvising the first
ca effect miraculous eures by working on this charged substance-but in            slory that occurred to
him, " You '11 see there a
Vienna, where he lived, his theories had met with scom and ridicule from
sea monster, and what a
te medical establishment.  In treating women for convulsions,  Mesmer
monsler! It's a creature
claired to have worked  a number  of eures,  his  proudest achievement
wilh five feet, three
being the restoration of sight to a blind girl. But another doctor who exam­      eyes, ami a beard Iike
that of a goat, only it's
ined the young girl sad she was as blind as ever, an assessment with whic
green ! "
she herself agreed. Mesmer countered that his enemies were out to slader
And slIre enough the
hir  by winning her  over  to  their  side.  This  claim  only  elicited  more    children seampered ofI
ridicule. Clearly the sober-minded Viennese were the wrong audience for           and Reb Feivel
returned to his stuches,
his theories, and so he decided to move to Paris ad start again.
He smiled into his
Rentng a splendid apartment in his new city, Mesmer decorated it ap­
beard as he thought of
propriately. Stained glass in most of the windows created a religious feel­       the trick he had played
ing, and mirrors on all the walls produced a hypnotc effect. The doctor           on Ihose lillie rascals,
It wasn 'I long bej(Jrc
advertised that in his apartment he would give demonstrations of the pow­
his studies were inter­
ers of animal magnetism, inviting the diseased and melacholie to fee! its
rupted again, this time
powers. Soon Parisians of all classes (but mostly women, who seemed more          by running footsteps,
attacted to the idea than men did) were paying for entry to witness the           When he went to the
window he saw several
miracles that Mesmer promised.
lews running,
Inside the apartment, the scents of orange blossom and exotc incense
" Where are you
wafted through special vents. As the initiates filtered into the salon where      running? "  he called
te  demonstrations  took  place,  they  heard  harp  music  and  the  lulling     out.
" To the synagogue!"
sounds of a female vocalist coming from aother room. In the center of the
answered Ihe lews,
saon was a long oval container filled with water that Mesmer claimed had
" Haven 't you heard?
been magnetized. From holes in the container's metal lid protruded long           There '8 a ,\'ea monster,
movable iron rods. The visitors were instructed to sit around the container,      there '5 a ereature wilh
five legs, three eyes, and
place these magnetized rods  on the  body part that gave  them pains or
a beard like thai of a
problems, and then hold hands with their neighbors, sitting as close as pos­
goat, only it's green! "
sible to one another to help the magnetic force pass between their bodies.        Reb Feivel laughed
Sometimes, too, they were attached to each other by cords.                        with glee, thinking of
                                                                                  the trick he had played,
Mesmer would leave the room, and "assistant magnetizers"-all hand-
                                                                                  LAW 27                      223

and sal down again 10                                                         some ad stapping young men-would enter with jars of magnetized
his Talmud.
water tat tey would sprinkle on te patients, rubbing the healing fluid on
Bul no sooner had he
their bodies, massaging it into their skin, moving tem toward a tancelike
begun 10 concentrate
when suddenly he                                                              state. And afer a few minutes a kind of delirium would overcome te
heard a dinning tumult                                                        women. Some would sob, some would shriek and tear their har, others
outside. And what did
would laugh hystericaly_ At the height of the delirium Mesmer would
he see? A great crowd
reenter the salon, dressed in a flowing silk robe embroidered wit golden
ofmen, women and
children, all running                                                         flowers and carying a white magnetic rod. Moving around te container,
toward the synagogue.                                                         he would stroke and soothe the patients until calm was restored. Many
" What's up ? "  he cried,
women would later attibute the strange power he had on them to his
sticking his head out of
piercing look, which, they thought, was exciting or quieting the magnetic
the window.
" What a question!                                                            fluids in teir bodies.
Why, don 't you know? "                                                       Within months of his arrival in Pais, Mesmer became the rage. His
they answered. "Right
supporters included Marie-Antoinette herself, te queen of France, wife of
in front of the syna­
Louis XVL As in Vienna, he was condemned by the official faculty of med­
gogue there :, a sea
monster. It's a creature                                                      icine, but it did not matter. His growing following of pupils and patents
with jive legs, three
paid hir hadsomely_
eyes, and a beard like
Mesmer expaded hs teories to proclaim that all humaity could be
that of a goat, only
it's green ! "                                                                brought into harmony trough the power of magnetism, a concept wit
And as the crowd                                                              much appeal during the French Revolution. A cult of Mesmerism spread
hurried by, Reb Feivel
across te county; in many towns, "Societies of Hamony" sprang up to
suddenly noticed that
experiment with magnetism. These societes eventually became notorious:
the rabbi himself was
among them.                                                                   They tended to be led by libertines who would tur their sessions into a
"Lord ofthe world!"                                                           kind of group orgy.
he exclaimed. "Ifthe                                                          At the height of Mesmer's populait, a French commission published
rabbi himself is
                                                                              a report based on years of testng the  theory of aimal magnetism. The
running with them
surely there must be                                                          conclusion: Magnetism's effects on the body actually came from a kind of
something happening.                                                          group hysteria and autosuggeston. The report was well documented, and
Where there 's smoke
ruined Mesmer's reputaton in France. He lef the county and went int
there's jre!"
retrement. Only a few years later, however, imitators sprang up all over
Without further
thought Reb Feivel                                                            Europe and te cult of Mesmerism spread once again, its believers more
grabbed his hat, left his                                                     numerous than ever.
house, and also
Interpretation
began running.
Mesmer's career can be broken into two parts. When still in Vienna, he
"Who can tell? " he
muttered to himself as                                                        clearly believed in the validit of his teory, and did all he could to prove
he ran, all out of                                                            it. But his growing fustation and the disapprova of his colleagues made
breath, toward the
hir adopt another stategy. First he moved to Paris, where no one knew
synagogue.
him, and where his extavagant theories found a more fuitfl soH. Then he
A TREASURY OF
JEWISH FOLKLORE,                                                              appealed to the French love of theater and spectacle, making his apartment
NATHAN AUSUBEL, EU.,
into a kind of magical world in which a sensory overload of smells, sights,
1 948
and sounds entranced his customers. Most iportant, fom now on he
practced his magnetsm only on a group_ The group provided the settng
in which the magnetism would have its proper effect, one believer infectng
the other, overwhelming ay individual doubter.
Mesmer thus passed from being a confirmed advocate of magnetsm
to the role of a charlata using every tick in the book to captvate te pub-
224                                                                           LAW 27

He. The biggest trick of all was to play on the repressed sexuality that bub­
bles under the surface of ay group settng. In a group, a longing for social
uity, a longing older than civilization, cries out to be awakened. This de­
sie ray be subsumed under a unifing cause, but beneath it is a repressed
sexality that the charlatan knows how to exploit and manipulate for his
ow purposes.
This is the lesson that Mesmer teaches us: Our tendency to doubt, the
distance that allows us to reason, is broken down when we join a group .
The warmth ad infectousness of the group overwhelm the skeptcal indi­
vidual. This is the power you gain by creating a cult. Also, by playing on
people's repressed sexuality,  you lead  them into mistaking their excited
feelings for signs  of your mystcal  stength.  You gain  untold  power  by
working  on  people's  unrealized  desire for a kind  of promiscuous  and
pagan unity.
Remember too that the most effective cuIts mix religion with science.
Tae the latest technological tend or fad and blend it with a noble cause, a
mystical faith, a new form of heaing. People's interpretations of your hy­
brd                                                                             c     will run rampant, and they will attribute powers to you that you
had never even thought to claim.
Image :  The  Magnet.  An  unseen  force  draws  objects  to  it,
whieh in turn become magnetized themselves, drawing other
pieees to them, the magnetie power of tlle whole constantly
increasing. But take away the original magnet and it all falls
apart.  Become the magnet,  the invisible  farce  that  attracts
people's imaginations  and holds them together.  Onee they
have clustered around you, no power can wrest them away.
Authority: The eharlatan achieves his great power by simply opening
a possibility far men to believe what they already want to believe
The  eredulous  eannot  keep  at  a  distance;  they  erowd  around  the
wonder worker, entering his personal aura, surrendering themselves
to illusion with a heavy solemnity, like cattle.  (Grete de Francesco)
LAW 27                                                                          225

REVERSAL
One reason to create a following is that a group is often easier to deceive
than an individual, and turs over to you tat much more power. This
comes, however, with a danger: If at any moment the group sees through
you, you will find yourself facing not one deceived soul but an angry crowd
that will tea you to pieces as avidly as it once followed you. The charlatans
constantly faced this danger, and were always ready to move out of town as
it inevitably became clear that their elixirs did not work and teir ideas
were sham. Too slow and they paid with their lives. In playing with the
crowd, you are playing with fire, and must constantly keep an eye out far
any sparks of doubt, any enemies who will                                       t        the crowd against you.
When you play with the emotions of a crowd, you have to know how to
adapt, attuning yourself instantaneously to all of the moods and desires that
a group will produce. Use spies, be on top of everything, and keep yOUf
bags packed.
For this reason you may ofen prefer to deal with people one by one.
Isolating them fom their normal milieu can have the same effect as puting
them in a group-it makes them more prone to suggeston and intimida­
tion. Choose the right sucker and if he eventually sees through you he may
prove easier to escape tha a crowd.
226                                                                             LAW 27

LAW
28
ENTER ACTION
WITH B OLDNESS
JUDGMENT
Iyou are unsure of a course of action, do not attempt it.
Your doubts and hesitations will infect your execution.
Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any
mistakes you commit thrugh audacity are easily cor­
rected with more audacity. Everyone admires the bold; no
one honors the timid.
227

BOLDNESS AND HESITATION:A Brief Psychological Camparisan
Boldness and hesitation elicit very different psychological responses in their
targets: Hesitation puts obstacles in your path, boldness eHminates them.
The path oJpleasure
Once you understand this, you will find it essental to overcome your nat­
never leads to glory.'
ural timidity and practice the                                                   a                                                                                of audacity. The following are among the
The prodigious
achievements of                                                                  most pronounced psychological effects of boldness and timidity.
Hercu les were the
result of high adven­
Te Bolder the Lie the Better.                                                    W                                                                                e all have weaknesses, and our efforts
ture, and though there
are never perfeet. But entering action with boldness has the magical effect
is little, äther in fable
or history, to show that                                                         of hiding our  deficiencies.  Con  artists know  that  the  bolder te  He, the
he had any rivals, still it                                                      more convincing it becomes. The sheer audacit of the story makes it more
is recorded that a
                                                                                 credible,  distracting attention  fom its inconsistencies.                       W                                                                             hen puttng to­
knight errant, in
company with a fellow                                                            gether  a con  or  entering  any  kind  of negotiation,  go  frther  than  you
adventurer, sought his                                                           planned.Ask for the moon and you will be surprised how often you get it.
fortune in a romantic
country. He had /lot
Lions Circle the Hesitant Prey.  People have a sixth sense for the weak­
traveled Jar when his
nesses of others. If, in a first encounter, you demonstrate your willingness
companion observed a
post, on which was                                                               to compromise, back down, and reteat, you bring out the Hon even in peo­
wrilten the Jollowing
pIe who are not necessarily bloodthirsty.  Everything depends on percep­
inscription: "Brave
tion, and once you are seen as the kind of person who quickly goes on the
adventurer, if you have
a desire to discover that                                                        defensive, who is willing to negotiate and be amenable, you will be pushed
which has never heen                                                             around without mercy.
seen hy any knight
errant, you have only
Boldness Strikes Fear; Fear Creates Authority.  The bald move makes
to pass this torrent, and
then take in your arms                                                           you  seem larger and more powerfl than you are. If it comes suddenly,
an elephant of stone                                                             with the stealth and swiftness of a snake, it inspires that much more fear. By
and carry it in one
intimidating with a bald move, you estabHsh a precedent: in  every sub se­
breath to the summit of
quent encounter, people will be on the defensive, in terror of your next
this mountain, whose
nohle head seems                                                                 strike.
blended with the sky. "
"Bllt, " said the knight's
Going Halfay  with  Half a Heart Digs  the Deeper  Grave.  If you
companion, '"the water
enter an action with less than total confidence, you set up obstacles in your
may be deep as weil as
rapid, and thollgh,                                                              own path.                                                                        W                                                                             hen a problem arises you will grow confsed, seeing options
notwithstanding, we                                                                                                                                                                                                                             where there are none and inadvertently creatng more problems stll. Re­
should pass it, why
treating from the hunter, the timid hare scurries more easily into his snares.
should we he encum­
bered with the
elephant? What a                                                                 Hesitation Creates Gaps, Boldness Obliterates                                    Tem.                                                                          W                                                                        hen you tae
ridiculous undertak­                                                             time to think, to hem and haw, you create a gap that allows others time to
ing.' "' And phi/osophi­
think as weH. Your tmidity infects people with awkward energy, elicits em­
cally and with /lice
barrassment. Doubt springs up on all sides.
calculatio/l, he
observed that the                                                                Boldness destroys such gaps. The swiftness of the move and the energy
elepha/lt might he                                                               of the action leave others no space to doubt and worry. In seduction, hesi­
carried four steps; hut
tation is fatal-it makes your victim conscious of your intentions. The bald
fär cO/lveyi/lg it t the
top of the mountain in                                                           move crowns seduction with triumph: It leaves no time for reflection.
Olle hreath, that was
                                                                                 /lot i/l the power ola                                                           Audacity Separates You fom the Herd.  Boldness gives you presence
                                                                                 mortal, u/lless it ,hould
                                                                                                                                                                  and makes you seem larger than life. The timid fade into the wallpaper, the
228                                                                              LAW 2 8

bold draw attention, and what draws attenton draws power. We    cannot         be the dwarffigure of
an elephant. fit only to
keep our eyes off the audacious-we cannot wait to see their next bold
be placed on the top of
move.
a stick; and then what
honor would there be
in such an adventure?
" There is, " said he.
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
"some deeeption in this
writing. It is an enigma
Observance I                                                                   only fit to amuse a
In May of 1925, five of the most successful dealers in the French scrap­       chi/d. I shall therefore
leave you and your
metal business found themselves invited to an "official" but "highly confi­
elephant. "
dential" meeting with the deputy director general of the Ministry of Post
The reasoner then
and Telegraphs at the Hotel Crillon, then the most luxurious hotel in Paris.   departed; but the
adventurous man
When the businessmen arrived, it was the director general himself, a Mon­
rushed with his eyes
sieur Lustig, who met tem in a swank suite on the top floor.
closed across the water;
The businessmen had no idea why they had been summoned to this
neither depth nor
meetng, and they were bursting with curiosity. Mter drinks, the director       violence prevented
explained. "Gentlemen," he said, "this is an urgent matter tat requires        hir, and according to
                                                                               the inscription he saw
complete secrecy. The goverment is going to have to tear down the Eiffel
                                                                               the elephant lying on
Tower." The dealers listened in stunned silence as the director explained      the opposite bank.
tat the tower, as recently reported in the news, desperately needed re­        He took it and carried
it to the top of the hili,
pairs. It had originally been meant as a temporary structure (for the Expo­
where he saw a town. A
sition of 1889), its maintenance costs had soared over the years, and now,
shriek from the
i a time of a fiscal crisis, the goverment would have to spend millions to     elephant alarmed the
fx it. Many Parisians considered the Eiffel Tower an eyesore and would be      people ofthe city, who
rose in arms; but the
delighted to see it go. Over tme, even the tourists would forget about it-it
adventurer nothing
would live on in photographs and postcards. "Gentlemen," Lustg sad,
daunted. was deter­
"you are all invited to mae the goverment an offer for the Eiffel Tower."      mined to die a hero.
He gave the businessmen sheets of goverment statonery filled with              The people, however,
were awed by his pres­
fgres, such as the tonnage of the tower's metal. Their eyes popped as they
ence, and he was aston­
caculated how much they could mae fom the scrap. Then Lustig led
ished 10 hear them
tem to a wating limo, which brought them to the Eiffel Tower. Flashing         proclaim hir sueeessor
a                                                                              official badge, he guided them through the area, spicing his tour with   to their king, who had
reeently died.
amusing anecdotes. At the end of the visit he thanked them ad asked
Great enterprises are
tem to have their offers delivered to his suite within four days.
only aehieved by
Several days after the offers were submitted, one of the five, a Mon­          adventurolls .\pirits.
sieur P., received notce that his bid was the winner, and that to secure the   They who ealculate
with 100 great nieety
sae he should come to the suite at the hotel within to days, bearing a cer­
every difficlllty and
tfed check for more tha 250,000 fancs (the equivalent today of about
obstacle which is likely
$1,OOO,OOO)-a quarter of the total price. On delivery of the ceck, he          to lie in their way, lose
would receive the documents confirming his ownership of the Eiffel Tower.      that time in hesitation,
                                                                               which the more daring
Monsieur P. was excited-he would go down in history as the man who
                                                                               seize and render avai/­
had bought and tom down the infamous landmark. But by the tme he ar­           able to the loftiest
rved at the suite, check in hand, he was beginning to have doubts about        p"rposes.
the whole affair. Why meet in a hotel instead of a goverment building?         FABLES,
JEAN DE LA FONTAINE,
Why hadn't he heard from oter officias? Was this a hoax, a scam? As he
1 621-1695
listened to Lustig discuss the arrangements for the scrapping of the tower,
he hesitated, and contemplated backing out.
LAW 2 8                                                                        229

Suddenly, however, h e  realized that the director had canged his tone.
Instead  of talking  about the  tower,  he  was  complaining  about his  low
Always set to work
salay,  about his wife's desire  for a f coat,  about how galling it was to
without misgivings on
the score ofimpru­                                                               work hard and be unappreciated. It dawned on Monsieur P. that this high
den ce. Fear offailure                                                           goverment official was asking for a bribe. The effect on hir, though, was
in the m/nd of a
not outrage but relief. Now he was sure that Lustig was for real, since in all
performer iso for an
of his  previous encounters with  French bureaucrats,  they  had  inevitably
onlooker. already
evidenee of failure. .                                                           asked for a litde greasing of te palm. His confidence restored, Monsieur P.
Actions are dangerous                                                            slipped the director several tousand francs in  bills, then handed hir the
when there is doubt as
certified check. In retur he received the documentaton, including a im­
to their wisdom;
pressive-Iooking bill of sale. He lef the hotel, dreaming of the profits and
it would be safer
to do nothing.                                                                   fare to come.
BALTASAR GRACIAN.                                                                Over the next few days, however, as Monsieur P. waited for corre­
1601-1658
spondence from the goverment, he bega to realize that something was
amiss. A few telephone calls made it clear that there was no deputy direc­
tor general Lustig, and there were no plans to destroy the Eiffel Tower: He
had been bilked of over 250,000 fancs!
Monsieur P. never went to the police. He knew what kind of reputa­
ton he would get if word got out that he had fallen for one of the most ab­
'1'1 1 1,:  ST( )HI                                                                                                                                             <                                                                              surdly audacious cons in history. Besides the public humiliaton, it would
111,11 S                                                                         M                                                                              :'(;                                                                           have been business suicide.
In a lowly thatehed                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Interpretation
cottage in the Namsan
Had Count Victor Lustig, con artst extaordinaire, tried to sell the Arc de
Valley there lived a
Triomphe, a bridge over the Seine, a statue of Balzac, no one would have
poor eoup/e. Mr. and
Mrs. fluh Saeng.                                                                 believed                                                                       h                                                                              . But the Eiffel Tower was just too large, to   improbable to be
The husband confined                                                                                                                                                                                                                           part of a con job. In fact it was so improbable tat Lustg was able to ret
himse/f for seven years
to Paris six months later and "resell" the Eiffel Tower to a different scrap­
and only read books in
iron  dealer,  and for a higher price-a sum in fancs equivalent today to
his cold room . .
One day his wife. all in                                                         over $1,500,000!
tears. said to him:                                                              Largeness of scae deceives the human eye. It distracts and awes us,
"Look here. my good
and is so self-evident that we cannot imagine there is any illusion or decep­
man! What is the llse of
tion afoot.                                                                      A                                                                              yourself with bigness and boldness-stretch your decep­
all your book reading?
I have spent my youth                                                            tions as far as they will go and then go frther. If you sense tat the sucker
in washing and sewing                                                            has suspicions, do as te intepid Lustig did: Instead of bacing down, or
for other peop/e and
lowering his price, he simply raised his price higher, by asking for and get­
yet I have no spare
ting a bribe. Asking for more puts the other person on the defensive, cuts
jacket or skirt to wear
and I have had no food                                                           out the nibbling effect of compromise and doubt, and overwhelms with its
to eat during the past                                                           boldness.
three days. I am hungry
and cold. I can stand
Observance II
it no more!"
. . . Hearing these                                                              On his deatbed in 1533, Vasily III, the Grand Duke ofMoscow and ruler
words. the middle-aged                                                           of a semi-united Russia, proclaimed his three-year-old son, Ivan IV,  as his
scholar closed his
successor.  He  appointed  his   young  wife,  Helena,  as  regent  untl  Iva
book . . . rose to his feet
reached his majorit ad could rule on his own. The aristocracy-the bo­
and . . .  withollt saying
                                                                                 another word. he wen!                                                          yars-secredy rejoiced: For years the dukes of Moscow had been tying to
out ofdoors                                                                      A rriv-                                                                        extend their authority over the boyars' turf.  With Vasily dead, his  heir a
                                                                                 ing in the heart ofthe
                                                                                                                                                                mere three years old, and a young woman in charge of the dukedom, te
230                                                                              LAW 2 8

boyars would be able to roll back the dukes' gains, wrest control of the        city, he stopped a pass­
ing gentleman. "Hello,
stte, and humiliate the royal family.
my friend! Who is the
Aware of these dangers, young Helena tumed to her trusted friend
richest man in town ? "
Prince Ivan Obolensky to help her rule. But after five years as regent she      "Poor countryman!
suddenly died-poisoned by a member of the Shuisky family, the most              Don 't you know Byan­
ssi, the millionaire? His
feasome boyar cla. The Shuisky princes seized control of the govem­
glittering tile-roofed
ment and threw Obolensky in prison, where he starved to death. At the age
house pierced by twelve
of eight, Ivan was now a despised orphan, and any boyar or family mem­          gates is just over there. "
ber who took an interest in hir was immediately banished or killed.             Huh Saeng bent his
                                                                                steps to the rich man's
And so Ivan roamed the palace, hungry, i clothed, and ofen in hid­
                                                                                house. Having entered
ing fom the Shuiskys, who treated hir roughly when they saw hir. On             the big gate, he flung
some days they would search hir out, clothe hir in royal robes, had him         the guest-room door
a scepter, and set hir on the throne-a kind of mock ritual in which they        open and addressed the
host: "I need 10,000
lapooned his royal pretensions. Then they would shoo hir away. One
yang for capital for my
evening several of them chased the Metopolitan-the head of the Russian
commercial business
church-through the palace, and he sought refge in Ivan's room; the boy          and I want you to lend
me the money."
watched in horror as the Shuiskys entered, hurled insults, and beat the
"Alright, sir. Where
Metropolitan mercilessly.
shall I send the
Ivan had one friend in the paace, a boyar named Vorontsov who con­              money?"
soled and advised hir. One day, however, as he, Vorontsov, ad the               " To the Ansang Market
in care of a commis­
newest Metropolitan conferred in the palace refectory, severa Shuiskys
sion merchant. "
burst in, beat up Vorontsov, and insulted the Metropolitan by tearing and
" Very weil, sir. I will
teading on his robes. Then they banished Vorontsov from Moscow.                 draw on Kim, who
Throughout all this Ivan maintained a strict silence. To   the boyars it        does the biggest
commission business in
seemed that teir plan had worked: The young man had tued into a ter­
the Ansang Market.
rified and obedient idiot. They could ignore hir now, even leave hir
You 'll get the money
aone. But on the evening of December 29, 1543, Ivan, now thirteen, asked        there. "
Prince Andrei Shuisky to come to his room. When the prince arrived, the         "Good-bye, sir. "
When Huh Saeng was
room was filled with palace guards. Young Ivan ten pointed his finger at
gone, all the other
Andrei and ordered the guards to arrest hir, have hir killed, and throw
guests in the room
his body to the bloodhounds in te royal kennel. Over the next few days          asked Byön-ssi why he
Ivan had all of Andrei's close associates arrested and banished. Caught off­    gave so much money to
a beggarlike stranger
guard by his sudden boldness, the boyars now stood in mortal terror of this
whose family name was
youth, te fture Ivan the Terrible, who had planed and wated for five
unknown to hir. But
years to execute this one swift and bold act that would secure his power for    the rich man replied
decades to come.                                                                with a triumphant face:
"Even though he was
Interpretation
in ragged c!othes, he
The world is fll of boyars-men who despise you, fear your ambiton, and
spoke c/early to the
jealously guard their shrinking realms of power. You need to establish your                                   point without betraying
authority and gan respect, but the moment the boyars sense your growing         shame or inferiority,
                                                                                unlike common people
boldness, they will act to thwart you. This is how Ivan met such a situation:
                                                                                who want to borrow
He lay low, showing neither ambiton nor discontent. He waited, and when         money for a bad debt.
the time came he brought the palace guards over to his side. The guards         Such a man as he is
had come to hate the cruel Shuiskys. Once they agreed to Ivan's plan, he        either mad or se Ir
                                                                                confident in  doing
struck with the swiftess of a snake, pointing his finger at Shuisky and giv­
                                                                                business. But judging
ing hir no time to react.                                                       from his dauntless eyes
Negotiate with a boyar and you create opportunities for hir. A small            and booming voice he
                                                                                LAW 2 8                       231

is an uncommon man                                                             compromise becomes the toehold he needs to tear you apart. The sudden
with a superhuman
bold move, without discussion or waring, obliterates these toeholds, ad
brain, worthy ofmy
builds your authority, You terrif doubters and despisers and gain te con­
trust. I know money
and I know men.                                                                fidence of the may who admire and glorify those who act boldly,
Money often makes a
man smalI, but a man
Observance III
like him makes big
money. I am only glad                                                          In 1514 the twenty-to-year-old Petro Aretino was working as a lowly as­
to have helped a big                                                           sistant scullion to a wealthy Roman family. He had ambitions of greatness
man do big business. "                                                         as a writer, to enflame the world with his name, but how could a mere
HEHlNIl THE SCENES
lackey hope to realize such dreams?
OF ROYAL PALACES
IN KOREA,                                                                      That year Pope Leo X received from the king of Portugal an embassy
HA TAE-HUNG,
that included many gifts, most prominent among them a great elephat,
1 983
the first in Rome since imperial times. The pontff adored this elephant ad
showered it with attenton and gifts. But despite his love and care, the ele­
phat, which was called Hano, becae deathly ill. The pope summoned
doctors, who administered a five-hundred-pound purgative to the ele­
phant, but a to no avail. The aimal died and the pope went into moum­
ing, To     console hirself he summoned the great painter Raphael and
Fear, which always
ordered hir to create a life-sized painting of Hanno above te animal's
magnifies objects, gives
tomb, bearing the inscription, "What nature took away, Raphael has wit
a body to all their
fancies, which takes for                                                       his art restored."
its form whatever they                                                         Over the next few days, a pamphlet circulated throughout Rome tat
conceive to exist in
caused great merriment and laughter. Entitled "The Last Will and Test­
their enemies' thoughts;
ment of the Elephant Hanno," it read, in part, "To my heir te Cardina
so that fearful persons
seldom fai! to fall into                                                                                                                                   Santa Croce, I give my knees, so that he can imitate my genuflectons. . . ,
real inconveniences,                                                                                                                                       To   my heir Cardinal Sant Quattro, I give my jaws, so that he can more
occasioned by imagi­
                                                                                                                                                           readily devour all of Christ's revenues                                       To   my heir Cardinal Medici, I
nary dangers                                                                   And
                                                                                                                                                           give my ears, so tat he can hear everyone's doings. . . ," To    Cadina
the duke, whose
predominant character                                                                                                                                      Grassi, who had a reputation for lechery, the elephant bequeathed the ap­
was to be always full of                                                                                                                                   propriate, oversized part of his own aatomy.
fear and of distrust,
On and on the anonymous pamphlet went, sparing none of the grea
was, of all men I have
in Rome, not even the pope. Wit each one it took aim at their best-know
ever seen, the most
capable offalling into                                                         weakness. The pamphlet ended with verse, "See to it that Aretno is your
false steps, by the dread                                                      friend / For he is a bad enemy to have. / His words alone could ruin the
he had offalling into
high pope / So God guad everyone fom his tongue."
them; being in that like
Interpretation
unto hares.
CARDINAL DE RETZ,                                                              With one short pamphlet, Aretino, son of a poor shoemaker and a servant
1613-1679                                                                      hirself, hurled hirs elf to fare. Everyone in Rome rushed to find out who
this daring young ma was. Even the pope, amused by his audacity, sought
hir out and ended up giving hir a job in the papal service. Over the years
he came to be known as the "Scourge of Princes," and his biting tongue
eared him the respect and fear of te great, from te king of France to te
Hapsburg emperor.
The Aretino strategy is simple: When you are as small and obscure a
David was, you must find a Goliat to attack The larger te target, the
more attenton you gain. The bolder the attack, te more you stand out
232                                                                            LAW 2 8

fom the crowd, and the more admiration you ea                                      . Sciety is fll of those
who think daring thoughts but lack the guts to print and publicize them.
THE BOY ArD
Voice what the public feels-the  expression of shared feelings is always
THE :ETTLE
powerfl.  Search  out the most prominent target possible and sling yoUf
A boy playing in the
boldest shot. The world will enjoy the spectacle, ad will honor te under­
fields got stung by a
dog-you, that is-with glory and power.                                             nettle. He ran home to
his mother telling her
that he had but touched
that nasty weed, and it
KEYS TO POWER
had stung him. "It was
Most ofus are tmid. We   want to avoid tension and conflict and we want to         just your touching it,
be liked by all. We   may contemplate a bold acton but we rarely bring it to       my boy, " said the
mother, "that caused it
life. We   are terrified of the consequences, of what others might tink of us,
to sting you; the next
of the hostility we will stir up if we dae go beyond OUf usual place.
time you meddle with a
Although we may disguise OUf tmidity as a concer for others, a de­                 nettle, grasp it tight/y,
and it will da you
sire not to hurt or offend them, in fact it is the opposite-we are really self­
no hurt."
absorbed, worried about oUfselves and how others perceive uso Boldness,
Da boldly what you da
on the oter hand, is outer-directed, and ofen makes people feel more at            at all.
ease, since it is less self-conscious and less repressed.                          FABLES,
A ESOP,
This can be seen most clearly in seduction. All great seducers succeed
SIXTH CENTURY B.e.
trough effrontery. Casanova's boldness was not revealed in a daring ap­
proach to the woman he desired, or in intrepid words to flatter her; it con­
sisted in his ability to surrender himself to her completely and to make her
believe he would do anything for her, even risk his life, whic in fact he
sometimes did. The woman on whom he lavished this attention under­
stood that he held nothing back from her. This was infinitely more flatter­        10\' TO BE
VICTORIOITS 1: LOVE
ing than compliments. At no point during the seduction would he show
hesitation or doubt, simply because he never feIt it.                              But with those who
have made an impres­
Part of the charm of being seduced is that it makes us feel engulfed,
sion upon your heart, I
temporarily outside of oUfselves and the usual doubts that permeate our
have noticed that you
Jives. The moment the seducer hesitates, the charm is broken, because we           are timid. This quality
become aware of the process, of their deliberate effort to  seduce us, of          might affect a bour­
geoise, but you must
teir self-consciousness.  Boldness  directs  attention  outward  and  keeps
attack the heart ofa
the illusion alive . It never induces awkwardness or embarrassment. And
woman of the world
so we admire the bold, and prefer to be around them, because their self­           with other weapons. . .
confidence infects us and draws us outside OUf own realm of inwardness             I tell you on behalf of
women: there is not one
and reflection.
ofus who does not
Few are bor bold. Even Napoleon had to cultivate the habit on the
prefer a tiftle rough
battlefield, where he knew it was a matter of life and death. In social set­       handling to tao much
tings he was awkward and timid, but he overcame this and practced bold­            consideration. Men
lose through blunder­
ness in every part of his life because he saw its temendous power, how it
ing more hearts than
could literally enlarge a man (even one who, like Napoleon, was in fact
virtue saves. The more
conspicuously small) . We also see this change in Ivan the Terrible: A harm­       timidity a lover shows
less boy suddenly tansforms himself into a powerful young man who com­             with us the more it
cancerns our pride to
mads authorit, simply by pointing a finger and taking bold action.
goad him on; the more
You must practice and develop YOUf boldness. You will ofen find uses
respect he has for our
for it. The best place to begin is often the delicate world of negotiation, par-
LAW 28

resistance, the more                                                       ticularly those discussions in which you are asked to set your own price.
respect we demand of
How ofen we put ourselves down by asking for too little. When Christo­
him. We  would will­
pher Columbus proposed that the Spanish court finance his voyage to the
ingly say 10 you men:
"A h, in pity 's  name do                                                  Americas, he  aso made the  insanely bold demand that he  be  called
not suppose us to he so                                                    "Grand Admiral of the Ocean." The court agreed. The price he set was te
very virtuous; you are
price he received-he demanded to be treated with respect, and so he was.
forcing u.\' to have toD
Henry Kissinger too knew that in negotiation, bold demands work better
mueh ofit                                                                  "
We are continually                                                         than statng off with piecemeal concessions and tying to meet the oter
struggling 10 hide the                                                     person halfay. Set your value high, and then, as Count Lustg did, set it
fact that we have
                                                                           higher.
permitted ourselves 10
he loved. Put a woman                                                      Understand: If boldness is not natural, neither is timidity. It is an ac­
in a position to say that                                                  quired habit, picked up out of a desire to avoid conflict. If timidity ha
she has yielded only to                                                    taken hold of you, then, root it out. Your feas of the consequences of a
a speeies of violence, or
                                                                           bold action are way out of proporton to reality, ad in fact the conse­
to surprise: persuade
her that you do not                                                        quences of timidity are worse. Your value is lowered and you create a self­
undervalue her, and I                                                      fulfilling cyde of doubt and disaster. Remember: The problems created by
will answer for her
an audacious move can be disguised, even remedied, by more and greater
heart                                                                      A httle more
audacity.
holdness on your part
would pul you holh at
your ease. Do you
remember what M. de
la Rochefoueauld told
you lately: "A reason­
ahle man in love may
aet like a madman,                                                         Image: The Lion and the
but he should not
Hare. The lion creates no
and eannol aet like
gaps in his way-his
an idiot. "
movements  are  too
LIFE, LETTERS, AND
EPlClJREAN PHILOSOPHY                                                      swif, his jaws too quick
OF NINON DE LENCLOS,
and powerful. The
NINON DE LENCLOS,
1 620-1 705                                                                timid hare will d o  any­
thing to escape danger,
but in  its haste to
retreat and flee, it backs
into traps, hops smack
into its enemies' jaws.
Authority: I certainly think that it is better to be impetuous than
cautious, for fortune is a woman, and it is necessary, if you wish to
master her, to conquer her by force; and it can be seen that she lets
herself be overcome by the bold rather than by those who proceed
coldly. And therefore, like a woman, she is always a friend to
the young, because they are less cautious, fiercer, and master
her with greater audacity.                                                 (Niccolö Machiavelli,                                                         1469-1527)
234                                                                        LAW 2 8

REVERSAL
Boldness should never be the strategy behind all of your actions. It is a tac­
tca instrument, to be used at the right moment. Plan ad think ahead, and
make the final element the bold move that will bring you success. In other
words, since boldness is a leamed response, it is also one that you lea to
control and utilize at will. To    go through life armed only with audacity
would be tiring and also fatal. You would offend too many people, as is
proven by those who cannot contol their boldness. One such person was
Lola Montez; her audacity brought her triumphs and led to her seduction
of the king of Bavaria. But since she could never rein in her boldness, it
aso led to her downfall-in Bavaria, in England, wherever she tumed. It
crossed the border between boldness and the appearance of cruelty, even
insanity. Ivan the Terrible suffered the same fate: When the power of bold­
ness brought hir success, he stuck to it, to the point where it became a life­
long patter  of violence and sadism. He lost the ability to tell when
boldness was appropriate and when it was not.
Timidity has no place in the realm of power; you will ofen benefit,
however, by being able to feign it. At that point, of course, it is no longer
tmidity but an offensive weapon: You are luring people in with your show
of shyness, all the better to pounce on them boldly later.
LAW 2 8                                                                          235

LAW
29
PLAN ALL THE WAY
TO THE END
JUDGMENT
The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking
into account all the possible consequences, obstacles, and
twists offortune that might reverse your hard work and
gve the glory to others. By planning to the end you will
not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know
when to stop. Gently guide fortune and help determine
the future b thinkingfar ahead.
236

TRAN S GRE S S I O N  OF THE LAW
In 1510 a ship set out fom the island of Hispaniola (now Haiti and the
There are very few
Dominican Republic) for Venezuela, where it was to rescue a besieged
men-and they are the
Spanish colony. Several miles out of port, a stowaway climbed out of a         exceptions-who are
provision ehest: Vasco Nufiez de Balboa, a noble Spaniard who had come         able to think and feel
beyond the present
to te New World in search of gold but had fallen into debt and had es­
moment.
eaped his creditors by hiding in the ehest.
CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ,
Balboa had been obsessed with gold ever since Columbus had re­                 1780-1831
tured to Span from his voyages with tales of a fabulous but as yet undis­
eovered  kingdom  called  EI  Dorado.  Balboa  was  one  of the  first
adventurers to come in search of Columbus's land of gold, and he had de­
eided from the beginning that he would be the one to find it, through
sheer audacity and single-mindedness. Now that he was free of his credi­
tors, nothing would stop hir.
TIlE TWO FHOCS
Unfortunately the ship's owner, a wealthy jurist named Francisco Fer­
Two frogs dwelt in the
nädez de Enciso, was frious when told of the stowaway, and he ordered
same pool. The pool
tat Balboa be left on the first island they came across. Before they found     being dried up under
any island, however, Enciso received news that the colony he was to res­       the summer's heat, they
eue had been abandoned. This was Balboa's chance. He told the sailors of       left it, and set out
together to seek
his previous voyages to Panama, and of the rumors he had heard of gold
another home. As they
in the area. The excited sailors convinced Enciso to spare Balboa's life,
went along they
ad to establish a colony in Panama. Weeks later they named their new           chanced to pass a deep
weil, amply supplied
settlement "Darien."
wifh water on seeing
Darien's first goveror was Enciso, but Balboa was not a man to let
which one of the frogs
oters steal the initative. He campaigned against Enciso among the              said to the other: "Let
sailors, who eventually made it clear that they preferred hir as goveror.      us descend and make
our abode in this weil,
Enciso fled to Spain, fearing for his life. Months later, when a representa­
it will furish us Iith
tve of the Spanish crown arrived to establish hirself as the new, official
shelter and foad. " The
goveror of Darien, he was tured away. On his retur voyage to Spain,            other replied with
tis man drowned; the drowning was accidental, but under Spanish law,           greater caution:
"But suppose the water
Balboa had murdered the goveror and usurped his position.
should fail us, how can
Balboa's bravado had got hir out of scrapes before, but now his
we get out again from
hopes of wealth and glory seemed doomed. To    lay claim to EI Dorado,         so great a depth ? "
should he discover it, he would need the approval of the Spanish king­         Do nothing without a
regard to the conse­
which, as an outlaw, he would never receive. There was only one solution.
quences.
Panamanian Indians had told Balboa of a vast ocean on the other side of
FABLES,
te Central American isthmus, and had said that by traveling south upon         AESOP,
SIXTH CENTURY RC,
tis western coast, he would reach a fabulous land of gold, called by a
nae that to his ears sounded like "Biru." Baboa decided he would cross
te treacherous jungles of Paaa and become the first European to bathe
his feet in this new ocean. From there he would march on EI Dorado. If he
did this on Spain's behalf, he would obtain the eterna gratitude of the
king, and would seeure his own reprieve-only he had to act before Span­
ish authorities came to arrest hir.
In 1513, then, Balboa set out, with 190 soldiers. Halfway across the
istmus (some ninety miles wide at that point) , only sixty soldiers re-
LAW 29                                                                         237

mained,  many  having  succumbed t  the  harsh conditions-te  blood­
sucking insects, the torrential rainfall, fever. Finally, from a mountaintop,
Look to the end, no
Balboa became te first European to lay eyes on the Pacific Ocean. Days
matter what it is you
are considerinl. 0ften                                                          later he marched in his armor into its waters, bearing te banner of Castile
enough, God Iives a                                                             and claiming al its seas,  lands, and islands in the name of the  Spanish
man a glimpse of
throne.
happiness, and then
Indians from the area greeted Balboa with gold, jewels, and precious
utterly ruins hir.
THE H ISTO R I F S ,                                                            pearls, te like of which he had never seen. When he asked where these
HEROllOTUS,                                                                     had come fom, the Indians pointed south, to the land of the Incas. But
FIFTH CENTURY B.C.
Balboa had  only  a few soldiers left.  For the  moment,  he  decided,  he
should return to  Darien,  send the jewels  and gold to  Spain as  a token
of good will, and ask for a large army to aid hir in the conquest of EI
Dorado,
When news reached Spain of Balboa's bold crossing of the isthmus,
1'1 1 1,:  KI'C. '1'1 1 1':  SI F!.                                             his discovery of the western ocean,  and his planned conquest of EI Do­
Al1l  '1' 1 1 1,:  SI'I{CEO,                                                    rado, the former criminal became a hero, He was instantly proclaimed
In ancient times a king                                                         goveror of the new land. But before te king and queen received word of
of Tartary was out
his discovery, they had already sent a dozen ships, under the command of
walking with some of
a man named Pedro Arias Davila, "Pedrarias," with orders to arrest Bal­
his noblemen. At the
roadside was an abdal                                                           boa for murder and to take command of the colony. By the time Pedrarias
(a wandering Sufi),                                                             arrived in Panama, he had lea                                                  ed that Balboa had been pardoned, and
who cried out:
tat he was to share the governorship with the former outlaw.
" Whoever will give me
All the same, Balboa felt uneasy, Gold was his dream, EI Dorado his
a hundred dinars, 1 will
give hirn some                                                                  only desire. In pursuit of this goal he had nearly died many times over,
good advice. "                                                                  and to share the wealth and glory with a newcomer would be intolerable,
The king stopped, and
                                                                                He  aso  soon  discovered  that Pedrarias  was a jealous, bitter man,  and
said: "A bdal, what is
this good advice for a                                                          equally unhappy with the situation. Once again, the only soluton for Bal­
hundred dinars?"                                                                boa was to  seize the initative by proposing to  cross  te jungle with a
"Sir, " answered the
larger army, carrying ship-building materials and tools. Once on the Pa­
abdal, "order the sum
cific coast, he would create an armada with which to conquer the  Incas.
to be given to me, and 1
will tell it you immedi­                                                        Surprisingly enough,  Pedraria  agreed to  the  plan-perhaps  sensing it
ately. " The king did so,                                                       would never work. Hundreds died in this second march through the jun­
expecting to hear some­
                                                                                gle, and the timber they carried rotted in the torrential rains.  Balboa, a
thing extraordinary.
The dervish said to                                                             usual, was undaunted-no power in the world could thwart his plan-and
hir: "My advic< is this:                                                        on ariving at the Pacic he began to cut down tees for new lumb er. But
Never bel(in anything
the men remaning to hir were to   few and too weak to mount an inva­
until you have reflected
sion, and once again Balboa had to retur to Darien,
what will be the end of
it. " At this the nobles                                                        Pedrarias had in any case invited Balboa back to discuss a new plan,
and everyone else                                                               and on the outskirts of the settlement, the explorer wa met by Francisco
present laughed, saying
                                                                                Pizaro, an old friend who had accompanied him on his first crossing of
that the abdal had been
wise to ask jor his                                                             the isthmus. But this was a trap :  Leading one hundred soldiers, Pizarro
money in advance. BU!                                                           surrounded  his  former  friend,  arrested  hir,  and  retured  hir  to  Pe­
the king said: "You
drarias, who tied him on charges of rebellion. A few days later Balboa's
have no reason to
head fell into  a basket,  along wit tose  of his  most  trusted followers,
laugh at the good
advice this abdal has                                                           Years later Pizarro hirself reached Peru,  and Balboa's deeds were for­
given me. No one is                                                             gotten.
238                                                                             LAW  2 9

Interpretation                                                                 unaware of the fact that
we should think weil
Most men are ruled by the heart, not the head. Their plans are vague, and
before doing anything.
when they meet obstacles they improvise. But improvisation will only
But we are daily guilty
bring you as far as the next crisis, and is never a substitute for thinking    of not remembering,
several steps ahead and planning to the end.                                   and the eonsequenees
                                                                               are evil. I very much
Balboa had a dream of glory and wealth, and a vague plan to reach it.
                                                                               value this dervish 's
Yet his bold deeds, and his discovery of the Pacific, are largely forgotten,   advice. "
for he committed what in the world of power is the ultimate sin: He went       The king decided to
bear the adviee always
part way, leaving the door open for others to take over. A real man of
in his mind, and com­
power would have had the prudence to see the dangers in the distance­
manded it to be written
te rivals who would want to share in the conquests, the vultures that          in gold on the walls
and even engraved on
would hover once they heard the word "gold." Balboa should have kept
his silver plate.
his knowledge of the Incas secret untl after he had conquered Peru. Only
Not long afterward a
ten would his wealth, and his head, have been secure. Once Pedrarias ar­       plotter desired to kill
rved on the scene, a man of power and prudence would have schemed to           the king. He bribed the
royal surgeon with a
kill or imprison hir, and to take over the army he had brought for the
promise of the prime
conquest of Peru. But Balboa was locked in the moment, always reacting
ministership ifhe thrust
emotionally, never thinking ahead.                                             a poisoned laneet into
What good is it to have the greatest dream in the world if others reap         the king's arm. When
the time came to let
te benefits and the glory? Never lose your head over a vague, open­
some ofthe king's
ended dream-plan to the end.                                                   blood, a silver basin
was placed to catch the
blood. Suddenly the
surgeon became aware
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
of the words engraved
In 1863 the Prussian premier Otto von Bismarck surveyed the chessboard         upon it: "Never begin
of European power as it then stood. The main players were England,             anything until you have
                                                                               rejeeted what will be
Frace, and Austria. Prussia itself was one of several states in the loosely
                                                                               the end ofit. " It was
al ied German Federation. Austria, dominant member of the Federation,          only then that he real­
made sure that the other German states remained weak, divided and sub­         ized that if the plotter
became king he eould
missive. Bismarck believed that Prussia was destined for something far
have the surgeon killed
geater than servant boy to Austria.
instantly, and would
This is how Bismarck played the game. His first move was to start a            not need to fulfill his
war with lowly Denmark, in order to recover the former Prussian lands of       bargain.
                                                                               The king, seeing that
Schieswig-Hoistein. He knew that these rumblings of Prussian indepen­
                                                                               the surgeon was now
dence might worry France and England, so he enlisted Austria in the war,       trembling, asked him
claming that he was recovering Schleswig-Hoistein for their benefit. In a      what was wrimg with
him. And so he
few months, afer the war was decided, Bismarck demanded that te
eonfessed the truth, at
newly conquered lands be made part of Prussia. The Austrians of course
that very moment.
were frious, but they compromised: First they agreed to give the Prus­         The plotter was seized;
sias Schleswig, and a year later they sold them Holstein. The world            and the king sent for all
                                                                               the people who had
began to see that Austria was weakening and that Prussia was on the rise.
                                                                               been present when the
Bismarck's next move was his boldest: In 1866 he convinced King                abdal gave his adviee,
William of Prussia to withdraw from the German Federation, and in doing        and said t them: "Do
you stili laugh at the
so to go to war with Austria itself. King William's wife, his son the crown
dervish? "
prnce, and the princes of the other German kingdoms vehemently op­
CARAVAN OF DREAMS,
posed such a war. But Bismarck, undaunted, succeeded in forcing the con­       IDRIES SHAH, 1968
flict, and Prussia's superior army defeated the Austrians in the brutally
                                                                               LAW 29                      239

short Seven Weeks War. The king and the Prussian generals then wanted
to march on Vienna,  taking as much land from Austria as possible. But
He who asks fortune­
Bismarck  stopped tem-now he  presented  himself as  on  the  side  of
tellers the future
unwittingly forfeits an                                                            peace. The result was that he was able to  conclude a treat with Austria
inner intimation of                                                                that granted Prussia and the  other  German  states  total autonomy.  Bis­
coming events that is a
marck could now position Prussia as the dominant power in Germany and
thousand times more
the head of a newly formed North German Confederation.
exact than anything
they may say.                                                                                                                                                   The French and the English began to compare Bismarck to Attila the
WALTFR BENJAMIN.                                                                                                                                                Hun, and to fear that he had designs on all of Europe. Once he had started
1 892                                                                              1 940
on the path to conquest, there was no telling where he would stop. And,
indeed, three years later Bismarck provoked a war wit France. First he
appeared to give his permission to France's annexation of Belgium, then
at the last moment he changed his mind. Playing a cat-and-mouse ga                 e,
he infriated the French emperor, Napoleon III, and strred up his ow
king against the French. To    no one's surprise, war broke out in 1870. The
newly  formed   German  federation   enthusiastically  joined  in  the  war
on  France, and once again the Prussian military machine and its  allies
destroyed the  enemy army in  a matter of months.  Although Bismarck
opposed taking any French land, the generals convinced him that Alsace­
Lorraine would become part of the federation.
Now all of Europe feared the next move of the Prussian monster, led
by  Bismarck,  the  "lron Chancellor. "  And  in  fact  a year later Bismarck
founded  the   German   Empire,   with   the   Prussian  king   as   the   newly
crowned emperor  and  Bismarck himself a prince.  But  then  something
strange happened: Bismarck instigated no more wars. And while the oter
European powers grabbed up land for colonies in other continents, he se­
verely limited Germany's colonial acquisitions.  He  did not want more
land for                                                                           Grmany, but more security. For the rest of his life he struggled t
maintain peace in Europe  and to prevent further wars.  Everybody as­
sumed he had changed, mellowing with the years. They had failed to un­
derstand: This was the final move of his original plan.
Interpretation
There is a simple reason why most men never know when to come off te
attack: They form no concrete idea of their goal. Once they achieve vic­
tory they only hunger for more. To    stop-to aim for a goal and then keep
to it-seems almost inhuman, in fact; yet nothing is more critical to te
maintenance of power. The person who goes too far in his triumphs cre­
ates a reacton that inevitably leads to a decline.  The  only solution is t
plan for the long run. Foresee the future with as much clarity as the gods
on Mount Olympus, who look through the clouds and see the ends of a
things.
From the beginning of his career in politics, Bismarck had one goa:
to form an independent German state led by Pussia. He instigated te
war with Denmark not to conquer territory but to stir up Prussian nation­
alism and unite the country. He incited the war with Austria only to gan
240                                                                                LAW 29

Pssian independence. (This was why he refsed to grab Austrian terri­
tr.) And he fomented the war with France to unite the German king­
doms against a common enemy, and thus to prepare for the formation of a
uited Germany.
Once this was achieved, Bismarck stopped. He never let triumph go
to his head, was never tempted by the siren call of more. He held the reins
tghtly, and whenever the generals, or the king, or the Prussian people de­
manded new conquests, he held them back. Nothing would spoil the
beauty of his creation, certainly not a false euphoria that pushed those
aound hir to attempt to go past the end that he had so carefully planned.
Expenence shows that, if oneforesees from far away the designs to be
undertaken, one can act with speed when the moment comes to execute them.
Cardinal Richelieu, 1585- 1 642
KEYS TO POWER
According to the cosmology of the ancient Greeks, the gods were thought
t have complete vision into the future. They saw everything to come,
right down to the intricate details. Men, on the other hand, were seen as
victims of fate, trapped in the moment and their emotions, unable to see
beyond immediate dangers. Those heroes, such as Odysseus, who were
able to look beyond the present and plan several steps ahead, seemed to
def fate, to approximate the gods in their ability to determine the fture.
The comparison is still valid-those among us who think further ahead
ad patiently bring their plans to fruition seem to have a godlike power.
Because most people are too imprisoned in the moment to plan with
tis kind of foresight, the ability to ignore immediate dangers and plea­
sures translates into power. It is the power of being able to overcome the
natra human tendency to react to things as they happen, and instead to
tain oneself to step back, imagining the larger things taking shape beyond
one's immediate vision. Most people believe that they are in fact aware of
te fture, that they are planning and thinking aead. They are usually de­
luded: What they are really doing is succumbing to their desires, to what
tey want the future to be. Their plas ae vague, based on their imagina­
tons rather than their reality. They may believe they are thinking all the
way to the end, but they are really only focusing on the happy ending, and
deluding themselves by the stength of their desire.
In 415 B.C., the ancient Athenians attacked Sicily, believing their ex­
pediton would bring them riches, power, and a glorious ending to the six­
ten-year Peloponnesian War. They did not consider the dangers of an
ivasion so far from hore; they did not foresee that the Sicilians would
fight all the harder since the battles were in their own homeland, or that
a of Athens's enemies would band together against them, or that war
would break out on several fronts, stretching their forces way too thin.
Te Sicilian expedition was a complete disaster, leading to the destruction
LAW 2 9                                                                       241

of one of the greatest civilizatons of all tme. The Athenians were led into
this disaster by their heats, not their minds. They saw only the chance of
glory, not the dangers that loomed in te distance.
Cardinal de Retz, the seventeenth-century Frenchman who prided
himself on his insights into human schemes and why they mostly                f, ana­
lyzed tis phenomenon. In the course of a rebellion he spearheaded
against the French monarchy in 1651, the young king, Louis XIV, and his
court had suddenly left Paris and established temselves in a palace out­
side the capital. The presence of the king so dose to the heart of te revo­
lution had been a tremendous burden on the revolutionaries, and they
breathed a sigh of relief. This later proved their downfall, however, since
the court's absence from Paris gave it much more room to maneuver.
"The most ordinary cause of people's mistakes," Cadina de Retz later
wrote, "is their being too much fightened at the present danger, and not
enough so at that which is remote."
The dangers that are remote, that 100m in te distance-if we can see
them as tey take shape, how may mistakes we avoid. How many plans
we would instanty abort if we reaized we were avoiding a small danger
only to step into a larger one. So much of power is not what you do but
what you do not do-te rash ad foolish actions that you refrain from be­
fore they get you into trouble. Plan in detail before you act-do not let
vague  plans  lead you into trouble. Wi tis have unintended conse­
quences? Wi I stir up new enemies? Wi someone else take advantage of
my  labors? Unhappy  endings  are  much  more common than happy
onesdo not be swayed by the happy ending in your mind.
The French elections of 1848 came down to a struggle between Louis­
Adolphe Thiers, the man of order, and Genera Louis Eugene Cavaignac,
te rabble-rouser of the right. When Thiers realized he was hopelessly be­
hind in this high-stakes race, he searched desperately for a solution. His
eye fell on Luis Bonaparte, grand-nephew of the great general Napoleon,
and a lowly deputy in te parliament. This Bonaparte seemed a bit of a
imbecile, but his name alone could get him elected i a country yearning
for a strong ruler. He would be Thiers's puppet and eventually would be
pushed offstage. The first part of te pla worked to perfection, and
Napoleon was elected by a large margin. The problem was that Thiers
had not foreseen one simple fact: This "imbecile" was in fact a man of
enormous ambition. Three years later he dissolved parliament, dedared
himself emperor, and ruled France for another eighteen years, much to
te horror of Thiers and his party.
The ending is everything. It is the end of te action that determines
who gets the glory, the money, te prize. Your condusion must be crystal
clear, and you must keep it constantly in mind. You must also figure out
how to ward off the vultures circling overhead, trying to live off the ca­
cass of your creation. And you must anticipate the many possible crises
that will tempt you to improvise. Bismarck overcame these dangers be­
cause he planned to the end, kept on course through every crisis, and
242                                                                           LAW  29

never let others steal the glory. Once he had reached his stated goal, he
withdrew into his shell like a turtle. This kind of self-control is godlike.
When you see several steps ahead, and plan your moves all the way
to the end, you will no longer be tempted by emotion or by the desire to
improvise. Your elarity will rid you of the anxiety and vagueness that are
te primary reasons why so many fail to conelude their actions success­
fully. You see the ending and you tolerate no deviation.
Image:
The Gods on
Mount Olympus.
Looking down on
human actions from the
elouds, they see in advance the
endings of all the great dreams that
lead  to  disaster  and  tragedy.  And
they laugh at our inability to see beyond
the moment, and at how we delude ourselves.
Authority: How much easier it is never to get in than to get yourself
out! We should act contrary to the reed which, when it first appears,
throws up a long straight ster but afterwards, as though it were ex­
hausted . . . makes several dense knots, indicating tat it no longer
has its original vigor and drive. We must rather begin gently and
eooUy, saving our breath for the eneounter and our vigorous thrusts
for finishing off the job. In their beginnings it is we who guide affairs
and hold them in our power; but so often onee they are set in motion,
it is they which guide us and sweep us along. (Montaigne, 1533-1592)
LAW 2 9                                                                        243

REVERSAL
It is a diche among strategists that your plan must indude alteratives and
have a degree of flexibilit. That is certainly tue. If you are locked into a
plan too rigidly, you will be unable to deal with sudden shifts of fortune.
Once you have examined the fture possibilities and decided on your tar­
get, you must build in alteratves and be open to new routes toward your
goal.
Most people, however, lose less from overplanning and rigidity than
from vagueness and a tendency to improvise constantly in the face of cir­
cumstance. There is no real purpose in contemplating a reversal to this
Law, then, for no good can come from refsing to think far into the fture
and planning to the end. If you are dear- and far-thinking enough, you
will understand that the fture is uncertain, and that you must be open to
adaptation. Only having a dear objective and a far-reaching pla allows
you that freedom.
24                                                                             LAW 29

LAW
30
MAKE YOUR
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
SEEM EFF ORTLESS
JUDGMENT
Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease.
All the toil and practice that go into them, and also all
the clever tricks, must be concealed. We you act, act e
fortlessly, as iyou could do much more. Avoid the temp­
tation of  revealing how hard you work-it only rises
questions. Teach no one your tricks or the will be used
against you.
245

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 1
The Japanese tea ceremony called Cha-no-yu ("Hot Water for Tea") has
\'(} '1'.\                                                                        '\ ,
origins in acient times, but it reached its peak of refinement in the six­
\1.\';'1'1':11                                                                    \ Il T I ' T
teenth century under its most renowned practitoner, Sen no Rikyu.  Al­
Date Masamune onee
though not from a noble family, Rikyu rose to great power, becoming the
sent for Tannyu to
decorate a pair of gold                                                           preferred tea master of the Emperor Hideyoshi, ad an important adviser
screens seven feet high.                                                          on aesthetic  and even political  matters. For Rikyu, the  secret of success
The artist said he
consisted in appearing natural, concealing the effort behind one's work.
tho/lght black-and­
One day Rikyu and his son went to an acquaintance's house for a tea
whi!e sketches would
sui! them, and went                                                               ceremony. On the way in, the son remarked that the lovely antique-Iook­
home again after                                                                  ing gate at their host's house gave it an evocatvely lonely appearance. "I
considering them care­
don't think so," replied his father, "it looks as though it had been brought
fully. The next moming
fom some mountain temple a long way off, and as if the labor required to
he came early and
made a large quantity                                                             import it must have cost a lot of money." If the owner of the house had put
of ink into which he                                                              this much effort into one gate, it would show in his tea ceremony-and in­
dipped a horseshoe he
                                                                                  deed Sen no Rikyu had to leave the ceremony early, unable to endure the
had hro/lght wilh him,
and then proceeded to                                                             affeetation and effort it inadvertently revealed.
make impressions of                                                               On another evening, while having tea at a friend's house, Rikyu saw
this all over one of the
his host go outside, hold up a lanter in the darkness, cut a leron off a tree,
S('feens. Then, wirh a
and bring it in. This charmed Rikyu-the host needed a relish for the dish
large hrush, he drew a
he was serving, and had spontaeously gone outside to get one. But when
numher of fines' across
them. Meanwhile                                                                   the man offered the lemon with some Osaka rice cake, Rikyu realized that
Masamune had come
he had planned the cutting of the lemon all along, to go with this expensive
in to wau'h his work,
delicacy. The ge sture no longer seemed spontaneous                               it was a way for the
and at this he wuld
co/Hain his irritation no                                                         host to prove his  cleveress. He  had  accidentally revealed how hard he
Ionger, ami muttering,                                                            was trying. Having seen enough, Rikyu politely declined the cake, excused
" What a heastly mess!"
hirself, and left.
he strode away to his
Emperor Hideyoshi once planned to visit Rikyu for a tea ceremony.
own apartments. The
retainers told Tannyu                                                             On the night before he was to    come, snow began to   fall. Thinking quicly,
he was in a very had                                                              Rikyu laid round cushions that fit exactly on each of the stepping-stones
temper indeed. "He
that led through the garden to his house. Just before dawn, he rose, saw
shouldn 'I look on while
that it had stopped snowing, and  careflly removed the  cushions. When
J am at work, then, "
replied the painter, "he                                                          Hideyoshi arrived, he marveled at the simple beauty of the sight-the per­
should wai! till it is                                                            fectly round stepping stones, unencumbered by snow-and notced how it
finished. " Then he took
called no attention to the manner in which Rikyu had accomplished it, but
up a sm aller hrush and
only to the polite gesture itself.
dashed in tOllches here
and there, and as he did                                                          Afer Sen no Rikyu died, his ideas had a profound influence on the
so Ihe prints of the                                                              practice of the tea ceremony. The Tokugawa shogun Yorinobu, son of the
horse-shoe tumed inlo
great Emperor Ieyasu, was a student of Rikyu's teachings. In his garden he
crahs, while the hig
had a stone lanter made by a famous master, and Lord Sakai Tadakatsu
hraad slrokes hecame
rushes. He Iflen turned                                                           asked if he could come by one day to see it. Yorinobu replied that he would
10 the olher screen ami                                                           be honored, and commanded his gardeners to put everything in order for
splashed drops ofink
the  visit.  These  gardeners,  unfamiliar  with  the  precepts  of  Cha-no-yu,
all over iI, and when he
thought the stone lanter misshapen, its windows being too small for the
had added a few hrush­
strokes here and Ihere                                                            present taste. They had a loca workman enlarge the windows. A few days
they hecame a flight of                                                           before Lord Saka's visit, Yorinobu toured the garden. When he saw the a-
246                                                                               LAW 30

tered windows he exploded with rage, ready to impale on his sword the           swallows over willow
trees. When Masamune
fool who had ruined the lantem, upsetting its natural grace and destroying
saw the finished work
te whole purpose of Lord Sakai's visit.
he was as overjoyed at
When Yorinobu calmed down, however, he remembered that he had                   the artist's skill as he
originally bought two of the lantems, and that the second was in his garden     had previously been
                                                                                annoyed at the appar­
on the island of Kishu. At great expense, he hired a whale boat and the
                                                                                ent mess he was
fnest rowers he  could  find,  ordering them to  bring the  lantem to  hir      making of the screens.
within two  days-a difficult feat at best.  But the  salors rowed  day  and     CHA-NO-YlJ:
night, and with the luck of a good wind they arrived just in tme. To   Yori­    THE JAPANESE TEA
CEREMONY
nobu's delight, this stone lantem was more magnificent than the first, for it   A. L. SADLER, 1962
had stood untouched for twenty years in a bamboo thicket,  acquiring a
brilliant antique appearance and a delicate covering of moss. When Lord
Sakai arrived, later that sa                                                    e day, he was awed by the latem, whic was
more magnificent than he had imagined-so gracefl and at one with the
elements. Fortunately he had no idea what time and effort it had cost Yori­
nobu to create this sublime effect.
T I i':  \ HIS                                                                  I'LI:C
M ,\STEH
Interpretation
There was once a
To    Sen no Rikyu, the sudden appearance of something naturally, almost
wrestling master who
                                                                                accidentally gracefl was the height of beaut. This beauty came without   was versal in 360 feints
wa                                                                              ing and seemed effortess. Nature created such things by its own laws     and holds. He took a
special liking tu one of
ad processes, but men had to create their effects through labor ad con­
his pupils, to whom he
trivance. And when they showed te effort of producing the effect, the ef­
taught 359 ofthem over
feet was spoiled. The gate came from too far away, the cuttng of the lemon      aperiod oftime. Some­
looked contrived.                                                               how he never got
around tu the tast trick.
You will often have to use tricks and ingenuity to create your effects
As months went by the
te cushions in the snow, the men rowing all night-but your audience
young man became so
must never suspect the work or the thinking that has gone into them. Na­        profiäent in the art that
tre does not reveal its tricks, and what imitates nature by appearing effort­   he bested everyone who
dared to face him in the
less approximates nature's power.
ring. He was so proud
ofhis prowess that one
day he boasted berore
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II                                                        the sultan that he could
                                                                                readily whip his master,
The great escape artist Harry Houdini once advertised his aet as "The Im­
                                                                                were it not out of
possible Possible." And indeed those who witnessed his dramatic escapes         respect for his age and
feIt tat what he did onstage contradicted commonsense ideas of human            gratitude for his
capacity.                                                                       tutetage.
                                                                                The sultan became
One evening in 1904, an audience of 4,000 Londoners filled a teater
                                                                                incensed at this irre ver­
to watch Houdini accept a chalienge: to escape from a pair of manacles          ence and ordered an
billed as the strongest ever invented. They contaned six sets of locks and      immediate match wäh
the royal court in
nine tumbiers in each cuff; a Birmingham maker had spent five years con­
attendance.
structing them. Experts who examined them said they had never seen any­
At the gong fhe youth
ting so intricate, and this intricacy was thought to make them impossible       barged forward with a
to escape.                                                                      tusty yell, only to be
confronted with the
The  crowd watched the  experts secure  the  manacles  on Houdini's
unfamiliar 360th feint.
wrists. Then te escape artst entered a black cabinet on stage. The minutes
LAW 30                                                                          247

The master seized his                                                            went by; the more time passed, the more certain it seemed that these man­
former pupil, lifted hir
aeles would be the first to defeat him. At one point he emerged fom the
high above his head,
cabinet, and asked that the cuffs be temporarily removed so that he could
and jung hir crashing
to the ground. The                                                               take off his coat-it was hot inside. The challengers refused, suspecting his
sultan and the assem-                                                            request was a trick to find out how the locks worked. Undeterred, ad with­
bly let out a loud cheer.
out using his hands, Houdini managed to lif the coat over his shoulders,
When the sultan asked
tur it inside out, remove a penknife from his vest pocket wit his teeth,
the master how he was
able to overcome such                                                            and, by moving his head, cut the coat off his ams. Freed from the coat, he
a strong opponent, the                                                           stepped back into the cabinet, the audience roaring with approval at his
master confessed that
grace and dexterity.
he had reserved a secret
Finally,  having  kept  te  audience  waiting long  enough,  Houdini
technique for hirself
for just such a contin­                                                          emerged fom the cabinet a second tme, now with his hands fee, the man­
gency. Then he related                                                           aeles raised high in triumph. To this day no one knows how he managed
the lamentation of a
the escape. Altough he had taken elose to an hour to free himself, he had
master of archery, who
never looked concered, had shown no sign of doubt. Indeed i seemed by
taught everything he
knew. "No one has                                                                the end tat he had drawn out the escape as a way to heighten te drama,
learned archery fram                                                             to make te audience worry-for there was no other sign that the perfor­
me, " the poor fellow
                                                                                 mace had been anyting but easy. The complaint ab out the heat was
complained, "who has
not tried to use me as a                                                         equally part of the act. The spectators of this and oter Houdini perfor­
butt in the end. "                                                               mances must have feit he was toying wit them: These maaeles are not­
A STORY OF S A A D I ,                                                           ing, he seemed to say, I could have freed myself a lot sooner, and fom a
AS TOLD IN
THE CRAFT OF POWER,                                                              lot worse.
R.G. H. Sl, 1979                                                                 Over the years, Houdini escaped from the chained cacass of an em­
balmed "sea monster"                                                             (a half octopus, half whalelike beast tat had
beached nea Boston); he had himself sealed inside an enormous envelope
from which he emerged without breaking the paper; he passed through
brick wals; he wriggled free fom stailackets while dangling high in the
air; he leaped from bridges into icy waters, his hands maaeled and his legs
in chains; he had himself submerged in glass cases fll of water, hands pad­
locked, while the audience watched in amazement as he worked himself
free, struggling for elose to an hour apparently without breating. Eac
time he seemed to court certain deat yet survived with superhuman
aplomb. Meanwhile, he said nothing about his methods, gave no elues a
to how he accomplished any of his tricks-he lef his audiences and critcs
speculating, his power and reputaton enhanced by their struggles wit the
inexplicable, Perhaps te most baffling trick of all was making a ten-thou­
sand-pound elephant disappear before an audience's eyes, a feat he re­
peated on stage for over nineteen weeks. No one has ever really explained
how he did tis, for in the auditorium where he performed the tric, there
was simply nowhere for a elephant to hide.
The effortessness of Houdini's escapes led some to think he used oc­
cuIt forces, his superior psychic abilites giving him special control over his
body. But a Germa escape artist named Kleppini elaimed to know Hou­
dini's secret: He simply used elaborate gadgets, Kleppini also elaimed t
have defeated Houdini in a hadcuff challenge in Holland.
Houdini did not mind all kinds of speculation floatng around about
248                                                                              LAW 3 0

his methods, but he would not tolerate an outight lie, and in 1902 he ehal­
lenged Kleppini to a handeuff duel. Kleppini aeeepted. Through a spy, he
Keep the extent 01 your
found  out the  seeret word to unloek a pair of Freneh eombination-loek
abilities unknown. The
cuffs that Houdini liked to use. His plan was to ehoose these euffs to eseape   wise man does not
fm onstage. This would definitively debunk Houdini-his "genius" sim­            allow his knowledge
and abilWes to be
ply lay in his use of meehanieal gadgets.
sounded to the bottom,
On the night of the ehallenge, just as Kleppini had planned, Houdini
ilhe desires to be
offered hir a ehoice of euffs  and he seleeted te ones wit the eombination      honored by all. He
lock. He was even able to disappear with them behind a sereen to mae a          allows you to know
them but not to
quck test, and reemerged seeonds later, eonfident of vietory.
comprehend them. No
Aeting as if he sensed fraud, Houdini refsed to loek Kleppini in the
one must know the
                                                                                                                                                   cus. The two men argued and began to fight,  even wrestling with each      extent 01his abilities,
oter onstage.                                                                   M                                                                  ter a few minutes of tis, an appaently agry, fustated                      lest he be disappointed.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              No one ever has an
                                                                                                                                                   Houdini gave up and loeked Kleppini in te euffs. For te next few minutes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              opportunity ollathom­
                                                                                                                                                   Keppini strained to get free. Someting was wrong-minutes ealier he         ing him entirely. For
                                                                                                                                                   ha opened the euffs  behind the sereen; now the same eode no longer        guesses and doubts
                                                                                                                                                   worked. He sweated, raeking his brans. Hours went by, te audienee lef,     about the extent 01 his
talents arouse more
ad finaly an exhausted and humiliated Kleppini gave up and asked to be
veneration than accu­
released.
rate knowledge 01
The euffs that Kleppini hirself had opened behind the sereen with the           them, be they ever so
great.
word   "C-L-E-F-S" (Freneh for  "keys")  now  clieked  open  only with the
BALTASAR GRACIAN,
word  "F-R-A- U-D. " Kleppini never figured out how Houdini had aecom­
1601-1658
plished this uneanny feat.
Interpretation
Altough we do not know for eertain how Houdini aeeomplished many of
his most ingenious eseapes, one thing is clea: It was not the oeeult, or any
kd of magie, that gave him his powers, but had work ad endless prae­
tce, all of whieh he earefully eoneealed from the world. Houdini never left
ay                                                                              ing to ehanee-day and night he studied the workings of locs, re­
searehed eenturies-old sleight-of-hand tics, pored over books on meehan­
ics, whatever he eould use. Every moment not spent researehing he spent
working his body, keeping hirself exeeptonaly limber, and learning how
to   eontrol his muscles ad his breathing.
Early on in Houdini's  eareer,  a old Japanese performer whom he
toured wit taught hir a acient tric: how to swalow an ivory bal, then
brng it baek up. He practieed this endlessly wit a sma peeled potato ted
to  a string-up and down he would maipulate te potato with his throat
muscles, until they were strong enough to move it without the string. The
organizers of te London handeuff challenge had seaehed Houdini's body
toroughly beforehand, but no one eould cheek the inside of his troat,
where he eould have eoneeaed small tools to help hir eseape. Even so,
Kleppini was fndamentaly wrong: It was not Houdini's tools but his prae­
tee, work, and research that made his eseapes possible.
Kleppini, in fact, was eompletely outwitted by Houdini, who set the
whole thing up. He let his opponent lea                                         te eode  to the Freneh euffs,
LAW 30                                                                          249

then baited hir into choosing those cuffs onstage. Then, during the two
men's tussle, the dexterous Houdini was able to change the code to ''-R­
A-U-D." He had spent weeks practicing this trick, but the audience saw
none of the sweat and toil behind the scenes. Nor was Houdini ever ner­
vous; he induced nervousness in others. (He deliberately dragged out the
time it would take to escape, as a way of heightening the drama, and ma­
ing the audience squirm.) His escapes fom death, always gracefl ad
easy, made hir look like a superman.
As a person of power, you must research and practice endlessly before
appeaing in public, onstage or anyhere else. Never expose the sweat and
labor behind your poise. Some think such exposure will demonstrate their
diligence and honesty, but it actually just maes tem look weaker-as if
anyone who practiced and worked at it could do what they had done, or a
if they weren't really up to the job. Keep your effort and your tricks to
yourself and you seem to have the grace and ease of a god. One never sees
the source of a god's power revealed; one only sees its effects.
A line [01poetryj will take us hours maybe;
Yet i it does not seem a moment's thought,
Dur stitching and unstitching has been naught.
Adam's eurse, William Butler Yeats, 1865-1939
KEYS TO POWER
Humanit's first notions ofpower came from primitive encounters with na­
ture-the flash of lighting in the sky, a sudden flood, the speed and feroc­
ity of a wild aima. These forces required no thinking, no planning-they
awed us by their sudden appearance, their graceflness, ad their power
over life and death. And this remains the kind of power we have always
wanted to imitate. Through science and technology we have re-created the
speed and sublime power of nature, but something is missing: Our ma­
chines ae noisy and jerky, they reveal their effort. Even the very best cre­
ations of technology cannot root out our admiration for things that move
easily and effortlessly. The power of children to bend us to their will comes
from a kind of seductive charm that we feel in the presence of a creature
less reflective and more gracefl than we are. We   cannot retur to such a
state, but if we can create the appearance of this kind of ease, we elicit in
others the kind of primitve awe that nature has always evoked in hu­
·mankind.
One of the first European writers to expound on this principle came
fom that most unnatura of environments, the Renaissance court. In 1e
Book of the Courtier, published in 1528, Baldassare Castglione describes te
highly elaborate ad codified manners of the perfect court citzen. And yet,
Castiglione explains, the courtier must execute these gestures with what he
cals spre;tura, the capacit to make the difficult seem easy. He urges the
courtier to "practice i all things a certain nonchalance which conceals al
250                                                                             LAW 3 0

astry and makes whatever one says or does seem uncontrived and effort­
less." We    all admire the achievement of some unusual feat, but if it is ac­
complished naturally and graceflly,  our admiraton increases  tenfold­
"whereas . . . to labor at what one is doing ad . . . to make bones over it,
shows an extreme lack of grace and causes everything, whatever its worth,
t be discounted."
Much of the idea of spreztura came from the world of                                 a. All the
great Renaissance artsts careflly kept their works under wraps. Only the
finished masterpiece could be shown to the public. Micelangelo forbade
even popes to view his work in process. A Renaissance artst was aways
carefl to keep his studios shut to patons and public alike, not out of fear
of imitation, but because to see the making of the works would mar the
magc  of their effect,  and  their  studied at                                       osphere of ease  and natura
beauty.
The Renaissance painter Vasari, also the first great                                 a                             critic, ridiculed
te work of Paolo Uccello, who was obsessed with the laws of perspective.
The effort Uccello spent on improving the appearance of perspective was
too obvious in his work-it made  his paintings ugly and labored, over­
whelmed by the effort of their effects. We   have the same response when we
watch performers who put too muc effort into their act: Seeing them try­
ing so  hard  breaks the  illusion.  1t  also  makes  us  uncomfortable.  Calm,
gacefl performers, on the other hand, set us at ease, creating the illusion
tat they are  not acting but being natura  and  themselves,  even when
everything they are doing involves labor and practice.
The idea of spreztura is relevant to  all forms of power, for power
depends vitally on appearances and the illusions you create. Your public
actions are like artworks: They must have visual appeal, must create antici­
paton,  even entertain. When you reveal the inner workings of your cre­
aton,   you   become   just   one   more   morta1   among   others.   What   is
understandable is not awe-inspiring-we tell ourselves we could do as well
if   we had the  money  and  tme.  Avoid the  temptaton  of showing how
clever you are-it is far more clever to conceal the mechanisms of your
cleveress.
Talleyrand's application of this concept to  his  daily life  greatly  en­
hanced the aura of power that surrounded him. He never liked to work too
had, so he made others do the work for him-the spying, the research, the
detaled  analyses.  With  all  this  labor  at  his  disposal,  h e  hirself never
seemed to strain. When his spies revealed that a certain event was about to
te place, he would talk in social conversaton as if he sensed its immi­
nence.  The result was that people thought he was clairvoyant. His  short
pithy statements  and wittcisms always seemed to summarize  a situation
perfectly, but they were based on much research and thought. To    those in
goverment, including Napoleon hirself, Taleyrand gave the impression
of immense power-an  effect entirely dependent on the apparent ease
wth which he accomplished his feats.
There  is  another  reason  for  concealing  your  shortcuts  and  tics:
LAW 30                                                                               251

When you let this informaton out, you give people ideas tey can use
against you. You lose the advantages of keeping silent. We   tend to want the
world to know what we have donewe want our vanit gratfied by hav­
ing OUf hard work and cleveress applauded, and we may even want sym­
pathy for the hOUfS it has taken to reach OUf point of artistry. Lear to
contol tis propensity to blab, for its effect is often the opposite of what
you expected. Remember: The more mystery surrounds YOUf actions, the
more awesome your power seems. You appear to be the only one who can
do what you do-ad the appearance of having an exclusive gif is im­
mensely power. Finally, because you achieve YOUf accomplishments
with grace ad ease, people believe that you could always do more if you
tied harder. This elicits not only admiraton but a touch of fea. YOUf pow­
ers are untapped-no one can fathom their limits.
Image: The Racehorse. From up close we would see the
strain, the effort to control the horse, the labored, painful
breathing. But from the distance where we sit and watch, it
is all gracefulness, flying through the air. Keep others at a
distance and they will only see the ease with which you move.
Authority: For whatever action [nonchalance] accompanies, no
matter how trivial it is, it not only reveals the skill of the person
doing it but also very ofen causes it to be considered far greater
than it really iso This is because it makes the onlookers believe that
a man who performs weIl with so much facility must possess even
greater skill than he does. (Baldassare Castiglione,                            1478-1529)
REVERSAL
The secrecy wit which you surround YOUf actions must seem lighthearted
in spirit. A zeal to conceal YOUf work creates a unpleasant, almost para­
noiac impression: you are taing te game too seriously. Houdini was care­
fl to make te concealment of his tricks seem a game, al part of te show.
Never show YOUf work untl it is finished, but if you put too much effort
into keeping it under wraps you will be like te painter Pontormo, who
spent the last years of his life hiding his fescoes fom te public eye and
only succeeded in driving hirself mad. Always keep your sense of humor
about yourself.
There are aso times when revealing te inner workings of your pro­
jects can prove wortwhile. It all depends on YOUf audience's taste, and on
252                                                                             LAW 30

te times in which you operate. P. T Barum recognized that his public
wanted to feel involved in his shows, and that understanding his trics de­
lighted them, partly, perhaps, because implicitly debunking people who
kept their sources of power hidden fom the masses appealed to America's
democratic spirit. The public also appreciated te showman's humor and
honesty. Bamum took this to the extreme of publicizing his own humbug­
ger in  his  popular  autobiography,  written  when  his  career  was  at  its
height.
As long as the partial disclosure of ticks  ad techniques is caefully
planned, rater than the result of an uncontrollable need to blab, it is the
ultimate in cleveress. It gives the audience the illusion of being superior
and involved, even while much of what you do remains concealed fom
tem.
LAW 3 0                                                                          253

LAW
31
C ONTROL THE OPTIONS:
GET OTHERS TO PLAY    WITH
THE CARDS YOU DEAL
JUDGMENT
The best decetions are the ones that seem to give the
other person a choice: Your victims feel the are in con­
trol, but are actually your puppets. Give people options
that come out in your favor whichever one the choose.
Force them to make choices between the lsser of two evils,
both of which seve your purpose. Put them on the hos
of a dilemma: The are gored wherever the tur.
254

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
From early in his reign, Ivan IV, later known as Ivan the Terrible, had to
The German Chancel­
conont an unpleasant reality: The country desperately needed reform,
lor Bismarck. enraged
                                                                               but he lacked the power to push it through. The greatest limit to his author­   at the constant criti­
it came fom the boyars, the                                                    Rssian  princely dass that dominated te                                         cisms from Rudolf
                                                                                                                                                               Virchow (the German
                                                                               country and terrorized te peasantry.
                                                                                                                                                               pathologist ami liberal
                                                                               In 1553, at the age of twenty-three, Ivan fell ill. Lying in bed, nearing       politician), had his
                                                                               deat, he asked the boyars to swear allegiance to his son as the new czar.       seconds call upon the
scientist to chal/enge
Some hesitated, some even refsed. Then ad there Ivan saw he had no
him to a duel. "As the
power over the boyars. He recovered from his illness, but he never forgot
challenged party, I have
te lesson: The boyas were out to destroy hir. And indeed in the years to
the choice ofweapons, "
core, many of the most powerfl of them defected to Russia's man ene­           said Virchow, "and I
choose these. " He held
mies, Poland ad Lituania, where they plotted teir retur and te over­
aloft two large and
trow  of te  czar.   Even  one  of Ivan's  dosest  fiends,  Prince  Andrey
apparently identical
Kurbski, suddenly tured aganst hir, defecting to Lithuania in 1564, and        sausages. "One of
becoming the strongest of Ivan's enemies.                                      these, " he went on, "is
infected with deadly
When Kurbski began raising troops for an invasion, te royal dynasty
germs; the other is
seered suddenly more precarious than ever. Wit emigre nobles foment­
perfectly sound. Let
ing invasion from the west, Tartars bearing down fom the east, and the bo­     His Excellency decide
yars strring up trouble  within the country,  Russia's vast size made it a     which one he wishes t
nightare to defend. I whatever direction Ivan  struck,  he would leave         eat                                                                             . and I will eat the
                                                                               other. " Almost immedi­
hrself vulnerable on the other side. Only if he had absolute power could
                                                                               ately the message came
he deal with this many-headed Hydra. And he had no such power.                 back that the chancel­
Ivan brooded until the moring of December 3, 1564, when te citi­               lor had decided to
cancel the duel.
zens of Moscow awoke  to  a strange  sight.  Hundreds  of sleds  filled  the
THE L1TTLE, BROWN
square before the Kremlin, loaded with the czar's teasures and with provi­
BOOK OF ANECDOTFS,
sions for the entire court. They watced in disbelief as te czar and his        CLiFTON FADIMAN, RD.,
1985
court boarded the sleds and left town. Without explaining why, he estb­
lished hirself in a village south of Moscow. For an entire mont a kind of
trror gripped the capital, for the Muscovites feared tat Ivan had aban­
doned them to the bloodthirsty boyars. Shops closed up and riotous mobs
gatered daily. Finally, on January 3 of 1565, a letter arrived fom the czar,
explaining that he could no longer bear te boyars' betayas and had de­
cided to abdicate once and for all.
Read aloud in public, te letter had a statling effect: Merchants and
commoners blamed te boyars for Ivan's decision, and took to the streets,
trrifing the nobility with their fury. Soon a group of delegates represent­
ing the church, the princes, and the people made the joumey to Ivan's vil­
lage, and begged the czar, in the name of the holy land of                     Rssia, to retur
to te throne. Ivan listened but would not change his mind. After days of
hearing their pleas, however, he offered his subjects a coice: Either they
grant hir absolute powers to gover as he pleased, wit no interference
fror the boyars, or tey find a new leader.
Faced with a choice between civil war and the acceptance of despotie
power, amost every sector of Russian society "opted" for a strong czar,
calling for Ivan's ret                                                         to Moscow and the restoration of law and order. In
LAW 3 1                                                                        255

February, with much celebration, Ivan returned to Moscow. The Russias
could no longer complain if he behaved dictatorially-they had given hir
'('HE LAR
this power themselves.
Once upon a time there
was a king ofArmenia,
Interpretation
who, being ofa curious
turn ofmind and in                                                             Ivan the Terrible faced a terrible dilemma: To   give in to the boyars would
need ofsome new                                                                lead to certain destucton, but civil war would bring a different kind of
diversion, sent his
ruin. Even i Ival cae out of such a war on top, the county would be dev­
heralds throughout the
astated and its divisions would be stronger than ever. His weapon of choice
land to make
the following                                                                                                                                                  in the past had been to make a bold, offensive move. Now, however, that
proc!amation:                                                                  kind of move would                                                              t                                                                         aganst him-the more boldly he confronted his
"Hear this! Whatever
enemies, the worse the reactions he would spak
man among you can
The man weakness of a show of force is that it stirs up resentent and
prove himself the most
outrageous liar in                                                             eventually leads to a response that eats at your authority_ Ivan, immensely
A rmenia shall receive                                                         creatve in the use of power, saw clearly that the only path to the kind of
an apple made ofpure
victory he wanted was a false withdrawal. He would not force the count
gold from the hands of
over to his position, he would give it "options": either his abdication, and
His Majesty the King! "
People began to swarm                                                          certain aarchy, or his accession to absolute power. To back up his move,
to the palace fram
he made it clear that he preferred to abdicate: "Call my bluff," he said,
every town and hamlet
"and watch what happens." No one called his bluff. By withdrawing for just
in the country, people
of al! ranks and                                                               a month, he showed te county a glimpse of the nightares that would
conditions, princes,                                                           follow his abdication-Tartar invasions, civil war, ruin. (All of these did
merchant ; farmers,
eventually come to pass aer Ivan's death, in the infamous "Time of te
priests, rich and poor,
Troubles.")
tall and short, fat and
thin. There was no lack                                                        Withdrawa and disappearance are classic ways of contolling the op­
of liars in the land, and                                                      tions. You give people a sense ofhow things will fall apat without you, and
each one told his tale to
you offer them a "choice" :  I stay away ad you suffer the consequences, or
the king. A ruler,
I ret                                                                          under circumstances that I dictate. In this method of controlling
however, has heard
practically every sort of                                                      people's options, they choose the option that gives you power because the
lie, and none of those                                                         alterative is just too unpleasant. You force their hand, but indirectly: They
now told him
seem to have a choice. Whenever people feel they have a coice, they walk
convinced the king that
into your trap that much more easily.
he had listened to the
best of them.
The king was begin­
ning to grow tired of
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 11
his new sport and was
As a seventeenth-century French courtesan, Ninon d e  Lenclos found that
thinking of calling the
whole contest off  with­                                                       her life had certain pleasures. Her lovers came fom royalty and aristoc­
out declaring a winner,                                                        racy, and they paid her well, entertained her with their wit and intellect,
when there appeared
a                                                                              satsfied her rather demanding sensual needs, and treated her almost as
before him a poor,
equal. Such a life was infinitely preferable to marriage. In 1643, however,
ragged man, carrying a
large earthenware                                                              Ninon's mother died suddenly, leaving her, at the age of twenty-three, to­
pitcher under his arm.                                                         tally alone in the world-no family, no dowry, nothing to fall back upon. A
" What can I do for
kind of panic overtook her and she entered a convent, turing her bac on
you? " asked His
her illustrious lovers. A yea later she lef the convent and moved to Lyons.
Majesty.
"Sire!" said the poor                                                          When she finally reappeared in Paris, in 1648, lovers and suitors flocked to
man, slightly bewil-                                                           her dOOf in   greater numbers than ever before, for she was the wittest and
256                                                                            LAW 3 1

most spirited courtesan of the  tme  ad her presence had been greatly             dered. "Surely you
remember? You owe
missed.
me a pot ofgold, and 1
Ninon's foHowers quickly discovered, however, that she had chaged
have come to
her old way of doing things, and had set up a new system of options. The          collect it. "
dukes, seigneurs, and princes who wanted to pay for her services could            " You are a perfeet har,
sir!" exclaimed the
continue to do so, but they were no longer in control-she would sleep
king. "1 owe you no
wt them when  she  wanted,  according to  her whim.  All their money
money!"
bought them was a possibility. If it was her pleasure to sleep with them only                                "A perfect liar, am I? "
onee a month, so be it.                                                                                      said the poor man.
                                                                                                             " Then give me the
Those who did not want to be what Ninon called a payeur could join
                                                                                                             golden apple!"
te large and growing group of men she caHed her martr                             men who vis­               The king, realizing that
ited her apartment principally for her friendship, her bitng wit, her lute­                                  the man was trying to
playing,   and  the   company   of  the   most  vibrant  minds  of the  period,                              trick him, started to
                                                                                                             hedge.
including Moliere, La Rochefoucauld, and Saint-Evremond. The martrs,
                                                                                                             "No, not You are not a
too,  however, entertained a possibility:  She would regularly select from                                   liarf"
tem a favori, a man who would become her lover without having to pay,                                        " Then give me the pot
ofgold you owe me,
ad to whom she would abandon herself completely for as long as she so
sire, " said the man.
desired-a week, a few months, rarely longer. A payeur could not become a
The king saw the
fvori, but a martr had no guarantee of becoming one, and indeed could             dilemma. He handed
remain disappointed for an entre lifetime. The poet Charleval, for exam­          over the golden apple.
pIe, never enjoyed Ninon's favors, but never stopped coming to visit-he           ARMENIAN FOLK-TALES
AND FABLES,
did not want to do without her company.
RETOLD BY
As word of this system reached polite French society, Ninon became                CHARLES DOWNING,
1 993
te object of intense hostility. Her reversal of the position of the courtesan
scandalized the queen mother and her court. Much to their horror, how­
ever, it did not dis courage her male suitors-indeed it only increased their
numbers and intensified their desire.  It became an honor to be a payeur,
helping Ninon to maintain her lifestyle and her glittering salon, accompa­
nying her sometimes to te theater, and sleeping with her when she chose.
Even more distinguished were the martrs, enjoying her company without
paying for it and maintaining the hope, however remote, of some day be­
coming her favori. That possibility spurred on many a young nobleman, as
word spread that none among the courtesans eould surpass Ninon in the
art of love. And so the married and te single, the old ad the young, en­
tered her web and chose one of the two optons presented to them, both of
which amply satisfied her.
Interpretation
Te life of the courtesan entailed the possibility of a power that was denied
a married woman, but it also had obvious perils. The man who paid for the
courtesan's services in essence owned her, determining when he could pos­
sess her and when, later on, he would abandon her. As she grew older, her
options narrowed, as fewer men chose her. To    avoid a life of poverty she
had to amass her fortune while she was young. The courtesan's legendary
greed,  then,  reflected a practical  necessity, yet also lessened her aHure,
siee the illusion of being desired is important to men, who are often alien-
LAW 3 1                                                                           257

ated if their parter is too interested in their money. As the courtesan aged,
then, she faced a most difficult fate.
1. P Morgan Sr. once
Ninon de Lenclos had a horror of any kind of dependence. She early
told a jeweler oJ his
acquaintance that he                                                            on tasted a kind of equality with her lovers, and she would not settle into a
was interested in                                                               system that lef her such distastefl options. Stangely enough, the system
huying a pearl scar!
she devised in its place seemed to satisf her suitors as much as it did her.
pin. fust a Jew weeks
The payeurs may have had to pay, but the fact that Ninon would only sleep
later, the jeweler
happened upon a                                                                 with them when she wanted to gave them a thrill unavailable with every
magnificent pearl. He                                                           other courtesan: She was yielding out of her own desire. The martrs'
had it mounted in an
                                                                                avoidance of the taint of having to pay gave them a sense of superiority; a
appropriate setting and
sent if to Morgan,                                                              members of Ninon's faterity of admirers, they also might some day expe­
together with a hilij(Jr                                                        rience the ultmate pleasure of being her fvori. Finally, Ninon did not
$5, 000. The Jollowing                                                          force her suitors into either category. They could "choose" which side they
day fhe package was
preferred-a feedom that left them a vestge of masculine pride.
returned. Morgan s
Such is the power of giving people a choice, or rather the illusion of
accompanying note
rea(i: "f like the pin,                                                         one, for they are playing with cards you have dealt them. Where the alter­
hut f don't like the
natives set up by Ivan the Terrible involved a certain risk-one option
priee. IJyoli will accept
would have led to his losing his power-Ninon created a situaton in whic
the enc!osed check Jor
$4,O((, please send                                                             every option redounded to her favor. From the payeurs she received the
hack the box with the                                                           money she needed to run her salon. And from the martrs she gained the
seal unbroken. " The                                                            ultmate in power: She could surround herself wit a bevy of admirers, a
enraged jeweler refused
harem from which to choose her lovers.
the check and dis­
missal the messenger                                                            The system, though, depended on one critical factor: the possibility,
in disgust. He opened                                                           however remote, that a martr could become a fvori. The illusion that
up the box to reclaim
riches, glory, or sensual satsfaction may someday fall into your victim's lap
the un wanted pin, only
is an irresistible carrot to include in your list of coices. That hope, how­
to find that it had been
renwved. fn its place                                                           ever slim, will make men accept the most ridiculous situatons, because it
was a check Jor $5, (((.                                                        leaves them the all-importat option of a dream. The illusion of choice,
TIIE LITTLE, BROWN                                                              married to the possibility of fture good fortune, will lure the most stub­
BOOK UF ANECDOTFS,
CUPTON FAlliMAN. Eil.,                                                          bor sucker into your glittering web.
1 985
KEYS TO POWER
Words like "freedom," "options," and "coice" evoke a power of possibility
far beyond the reality of the benefits they entail. When examined closely,
the choices we have-in the marketplace, in elections, in our jobs-tend to
have noticeable limitations: They are ofen a matter of a choice simply be­
tween A and B, with the rest of the alphabet out of the pieture. Yet as long
as the faintest mirage of choice flickers on, we rarely focus on the missing
optons. We   "choose" to believe that the game is fair, and that we have ou
freedom. We   prefer not to think too much about the depth of our liberty to
choose.
This unwillingness to probe the smallness of our coices sters fom
the fact that too much freedom creates a kind of anxiety. The phrase "un­
limited options" sounds infinitely promising, but unlimited options would
actually paralyze us and cloud our ability to choose. Our limited range of
choices comforts uso
258                                                                             LAW 3 1

This supplies the clever ad cunning wit enormous opportunities for
deception. For people who are choosing between alteratives find it hard
to believe they are being manipulated or deceived; they cannot see that
you are allowing them a small amount of fee will in exchange for a much
more powerful imposition of your own will. Setting up a narrow range of
choices, then, should always be a part of your deceptons. There is a say­
ing: If you can get the bird to walk into the cage on its own, it will sing that
much more prettly.
The following are among the most common forms of "controlling the
options":
Color the Choices.  This was a favored technique of Henry Kissinger. As
Pesident Richard Nixon's secretary of state, Kissinger considered hirself
better informed than his boss, and believed that in most situatons he could
make the best decision on his own. But if he tried to determine policy, he
would offend or perhaps enrage a notoriously insecure man. S Kissinger
would propose three or four choices of action for each situaton, ad would
present them in such a way that the one he preferred always seemed the
best solution compared to the others. Time afer tme,  Nixon fell for the
bait, never suspecting that he was moving where Kissinger pushed hir.
This is an excellent device to use on the insecure master.
Force the Resister.  One of the main problems faced by Dr. Milton H. Er­
ickson, a pioneer of hypnosis therapy in the 1950s, was the relapse. His pa­
tents might seem to be recovering rapidly, but their apparent susceptibility
to the therapy masked a deep resistance: They would soon relapse into old
habits, blame the doctor, and stop coming to see hir. To   avoid this, Erick­
son began ordering some patients to have a relapse, to make themselves feel
as bad as when they first came in-to go back to square one. Faced with
tis  option,  the  patients  would  usualy  "choose" to  avoid the  relapse­
which, of course, was what Erickson really wanted.
This is a good technique to use on children and other willfl people
who  enjoy doing the  opposite of what you  ask them to:  Psh them to
"choose" what you want them to do by appearing to advocate the opposite.
Alter the Playing Field.  In the 1860s, John D. Rockefeller set out to cre­
ate an oil monopoly. If he tried to buy up the smaller oil companies they
would figure out what he was doing and fight back. Instead, he began se­
cretly buying up the ralway companies that transported the oil. When he
ten attempted to take over a partcular company, and met with resistace,
he reminded them of their dependence on the rails. Refusing them ship­
ping, or simply raising their fees, could ruin their business. Rockefeller a­
tered the playing field so that the only options the small oil producers had
were the ones he gave them.
In this tactic your opponents know their hand is being forced, but it
doesn't matter. The technique is effectve against those who resist at all
costs.
LAW 3 1                                                                            259

T                                                                                  e  Shrinking  Options.  The late-nineteenth-century art dealer Am­
broise Vollard perfected this technique.
Customers would come to Vollard's shop to see some Cezannes. He
would show tree paintings, neglect to menton a price, and pretend to
doze off. The visitors would have to leave without deciding. They would
usually come back the next day to see the paintings again, but this time
Vollard would pull out less interestng works, pretending he thought they
were the same ones. The baffled customers would look at the new offer­
ings, leave to think them over, ad retur yet agan. Once again the same
thing would happen: Vollard would show paintings of lesser quality still. Fi­
nally the buyers would realize they had better grab what he was showing
them, because tomorrow they would have to settle far something worse,
perhaps at even higher prices.
A variation on this technique is to raise the price every time the buyer
hesitates and another day goes by. This is an excellent negotiating ploy to
use on the chronically indecisive, who will fal for the idea that they are get­
ting a better deal today than if they wait till tomorrow.
T                                                                                  e Weak Man on the Precipice.  The weak are the easiest to maneuver
by controlling their optons. Cardinal de Retz, the great seventeenth-cen­
tury provocateur, served as an unofficial assistant to the Duke of Orleans,
who was notoriously indecisive. It was a constant struggle to convince the
duke to take acton-he would hem and haw, weigh the options, and wait
till the last moment, giving everyone around hir an ulcer. But Retz discov­
ered a way to handle hir: He would describe all sorts of dagers, exagger­
atng them as much as possible, until the duke saw a yawning abyss i
every direction except one: the one Retz was pushing hir to tae.
This tactic is similar to "Color the Choices," but with the weak you
have to be more aggressive. Work on their emotions-use fear and terror
to propel them into action. Try reason and they will always find a way to
procrastinate.
Brothers in Crime.  This is a classic con-artist technique: You attact YOUf
victims to same criminal scheme, creating a bond of blood and guilt be­
tween you. They participate in your deception, commit a crime (or think
they do-see the story of Sam Geezil in Law 3), and are easily manipu­
lated. Serge Stavisky, the great French con artist of the 1920s, so entangled
the goverment in his scams and swindles that the state did not dare to
prosecute hir, and "chose" to   leave hir alone. It is often wise to   implicate
in   your deceptons the very person who can do you the most harm if  you
fail. Their involvement can be subtle-even a hint of their involvement
will narrow their options and buy their silence.
T                                                                                  e  Horns  of  a  Dilemma. This idea was demonstrated by General
William Sherman's infamous march through Georgia during the American
Civil War. Although the Confederates knew what direction Sherman was
260                                                                                LAW 3 1

heading in, they never kew if he would attack from the lef or the right, for
he divided his army into two wings                                              and if the rebels retreated from one
wing they found themselves facing the other. This is a classic trial lawyer's
technique: The lawyer leads te witnesses to decide between two possible
explanations of an event, both of which poke a hole in their story. They
have  to  answer the lawyer's questions,  but whatever they say they hurt
temselves. The key to this move is to stike quickly: Deny the victim the
te  to  think  of an  escape.  As they  wriggle  between  the  hors  of the
dlemma, they dig their own grave.
Understand: In your struggles with your rivals, it will ofen be necessary
for you to hurt them. And if you are clearly the agent of their punishment,
expect a counterattack-expect revenge. If, however, they seem to them­
selves to be the agents of their own misfortune, they will submit quietly.
When Ivan left Moscow for his rural village, the citizens asking hir to re­
tr agreed to his demand for absolute power. Over the years to come,
tey resented hir less for the terror he unleashed on the country, because,
aer all, they had granted hir his power themselves. This is why it is al­
ways good to allow your victims their choice of poison, and to cloak your
involvement in providing it to them as far                                      a                                      possible.
Image : The    H o r n s    o f
the  Bull.  The   bull
backs you    into the cor­
ner with its    horns-not
a snge hor   which   you
might be   able to es­
cape, but a    pair ofhors
tat you                                                                         within their
hold. Run   right or run
left-either    w a y   y 0 u
move  into  their  piercing
ends  and  are  gored.
Authority: For the wounds and every other evil that men inflict upon them­
selves spontaneously,  and  of their own choice, are in  the long run less
painful  than those inflicted by others.  (Niccolo Machiavelli,                 1469-1527)
LAW 3 1                                                                         261

REVERSAL
Controlling the options has one main purpose: to disguise yourself as the
agent  of power and punishment.  The tactic works best,  then,  for  those
whose power is fragile, and who cannot operate too openly without incur­
ring suspicion, resent                                                           ent, and ager. Even as a general rule, however, it is
raely wise to be seen as exerting power directly and forceflly, no matter
how secure or strong you are. 1t is usually more elegant and more effective
to give people the illusion of choice.
On the other hand, by limiting other people's options you sometimes
limit your  OW                                                                   .   There  are situations in which it is to your  advantage to
allow your rivals a large degree of feedom: As you watch them operate,
you give yourself rich opportunities to spy, gather information, and plan
your deceptons. The  nineteenth-century banker James Rothschild liked
this method: He feIt that if he tried to control his opponents' movements,
he  lost  the  chance  to  observe  their strategy and plan  a more  effective
course. The  more freedom he alowed them in te  short term, the  more
forceflly he could act against them in the long run.
262                                                                              LAW 3 1

LAW
32
PLAY TO PEOPLE'S
FANTASIES
JUDGMENT
The truth is ofen avoided because it is ugly and un­
plasant. Never apeal to truth and reality unless you
are prepared for the anger that comes from disen­
chantment. Lie is so harsh and distressing that peol
who can manufacture romance o conjure upfantasy are
like oases in the deset: Everone flocks to them. There is
great power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses.
263

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
The city-state of Venice was prosperous for so long that its citizens feIt their
TIIE F  \F, IL\ L  OF
small republic had destiny on its side. In the Middle Ages and High Re­
'1'11 1':  LlO' I': S
naissance, its virtual monopoly on trade to te east made it te wealthiest
The !ion having
city in Europe. Under a beneficent republican goverment, Venetans en­
sudden/y lost his
queen, every one                                                                   joyed liberties that few oter Italians had ever known. Yet in the sixteent
hastened (0 show alle­
century their fortunes suddenly chaged. The opening of the New World
giance to the monarch,
transferred power to the Atlantic side of Europe-to the Spanish and Por­
by offering conso/a­
tuguese, and later the Dutch and English. Venice could not compete eco­
tirm, These comp/i­
ments, a/as, served but                                                            nomically  and  its  empire gradually  dwindled.  The  final  blow  was  the
to increase the                                                                    devastating  loss   of  a  prized   Mediterranean  possession,   the   island  of
widower's affliction.
Cyprus, captred from Venice by the Turks in 1570.
Due nmice was given
throughout the king­                                                               Now noble families went broke in Venice, ad banks began to fold. A
dom that the funeral                                                               kind of gloom and depression settled over the citizens. They had known a
wou/d be performed at                                                              glittering past-had either lived through it or heard stories about it fror
a certain time and
                                                                                   their elders. The closeness of the glory years was humiliating. The Vene­
place; the lion:, officers
were ordered to be in                                                              tians  half believed that the goddess Fortune  was  only playing a joke on
allendance, to regulate                                                            them, and that te old days would soon retur. For the tme being, though,
the ceremony, and
what could they do?
place the company
In 1589 rumors began to swirl around Venice of the arrival not far
according to their
respeclive rank.                                                                   away  of a mysterious man called "11 Bragadino," a master of alchemy, a
One may weil judge no                                                              man who had won incredible wealt through his abilit, it was said, to mul­
one absented hirself
tiply gold through the use of a secret substance. The rumor spread quicly
The monarch gave way
because a few years earlier, a Venetian nobleman passing through Poland
to his grief and the
whole cave, !ions hav­                                                             had heard a leamed man prophesy that Venice would recover her  past
ing no other temples,                                                              glory and power if she could find a man who understood the alchemic a
resounded with his
of manufacturing gold. And so, as word reached Venice of the gold this
cries. After his example,
Bragadino  possessed-he  clinked  gold coins  continuously in  his  hands,
all the courtiers roared
in their different tones,                                                          and golden objects filled his palace-some began to dream: Through hir,
A court is (he sort of                                                             their cit would prosper again.
place where everyone is
Members of Venice's most important noble families accordingly went
either sorrowful, gay,
togeter to  Brescia, where Bragadino lived. They toured his palace ad
or indifferent to every­
thing, just as (he reign­                                                          watched  in  awe  as  he  demonstrated  his  gold-making abilities,  taking  a
ing prince may think                                                               pinch of seemingly  worthless  minerals  and transforming it into several
fit; or ifany one is not
ounces of gold dust. The Venetian senate prepared to debate the idea of ex­
actually, he at least tries
tending an official invitation to Bragadino to stay in Venice at the city's ex­
to appear so; each
endeavors to mimic the                                                             pense, when word suddenly reached them that they were competing wt
master It is truly said                                                            the Duke of Mantua for bis services. They head of a magnificent party in
that one mind animates
Bragadino's palace for  the duke, featuring garments wit golden buttons,
a thousand bodies,
gold watches, gold plates, and on and  on.  Worried they might lose Bra­
clearly showing that
human beings                                                                                                                                                           gadino to Mantua, the senate voted almost unanimously to invite hir to
are mere machines.                                                                                                                                                     Venice, promising him the  mountain of  money he  would need to contnue
But let lls retur to our
                                                                                                                                                                       living in his luxurious style-but only if he came right away.
subject, The stag aüme
shed no (ears, How                                                                                                                                                     Late that year the mysterious Bragadino arrived in Venice. With h
could he, forsooth? The                                                                                                                                                piercing dark eyes under thick brows, and the two enormous black mastiffs
death ofthe queen                                                                  that accompanied                                                                    h                                                                           everywhere, he was forbidding and impressive. He
avenged hir; she had
took up residence in a sumptuous palace on te  island of the Giudecca,
26    LAW 32

wt the republic fnding his banquets, his expensive clothes, and all his          formerly strangled his
wife  and son. A courtier
oter whims. A kind of alchemy fever spread through Venice. On street
thought fit to inform the
corers,  hawkers  would  sell  coal,  distlling  apparatus,  bellows,  how-to
bereaved monarch, and
books on the subject. Everyone began to practce acemy-everyone ex­               even affirmed that he
cept Bragadino.                                                                  had seen the stag laugh.
                                                                                 The rage of a king, says
The alchemist seemed to be in no hurry to begin manufacturing the
                                                                                 Solomon, is terrible,
gold that  would  save  Venice from  ruin.  Stangely  enough  this  only  in­    and especially that of
creased his populaity and following; people thronged from all over Eu­           a lion-king. "Pitiful
                                                                                 foresterf" he exclaimed,
rope, even Asia, to meet this remarkable man. Months went by, with gifs
                                                                                 "darest thou laugh
pouring in to Bragadino from all sides. Stll he gave no sign of the miracle      when all around are
tat the Venetians confidently expected hir to produce. Eventually the cit­       dissolved in tears? We
will not soU our royal
izens began to grow impatient, wondering if he would wait forever. At first
claws with thy profane
te senators wared them not to hurry hir-he was a capricious devil,
blood! Do thou, brave
who needed to be cajoled. Finally, though, the nobility began to wonder          wolf avenge our queen,
to, and the senate came under pressure to show a retur on the city's bal­        by immolating this
traitor to her august
looning investment.
manes. "
Bragadino had only scor for the doubters, but he responded to them.
Hereupon the stag
He had, he said, already deposited in the city's mint the mysterious sub­        replied: "Sire, the time
st                                                                               ce with which he multiplied gold. He could use this substance up all at   for weeping is passed;
grief is here superflu­
once, and produce double the gold, but the more slowly te process took
ous. Your revered
place, the more it would yield. If left aone for seven years, sealed in a cas­   spouse appeared to me
ket, the substance would multiply the gold in the mint thirty times over.        but now, reposing on a
bed of roses; J instantly
Most of the  senators  agreed  to  wait to  reap the gold  mine  Bragadino
recognized her. 'Friend, '
promised. Others, however, were angry: seven more yeas of this man liv­
said she to me, 'have
ig royally at the  public tough!  And many of the common citizens  of            done with this funereal
pomp, cease these
Venice echoed these sentiments. Finaly the alchemist's enemies demanded
useless tears. I have
he produce a proof of his skills: a substantial amount of gold, ad soon.
tasted a thousand
Lofty, apparently devoted to his                                                 a, Bragadino responded that Venice,                                       delights in the Elysian
i its impatience, had betayed hir, and would therefore lose his services.        fields, conversing with
those who are saints like
He left town, going first to nearby Padua, then, i 1590, to Munich, at the
myself Let the king's
ivitation of the Duke of Bavaria, who, like the entire city of Venice, had
despair remain for
kown great wealth but had fallen into bankruptcy through his own profli­         some time unchecked. it
gacy, and hoped to regain his fortune through the famous alcemist's ser­         gratifies me. ' " Scarcely
had he spoken, when
vices. And  so Bragadino  resumed the  comfortable arrangement he had
every one shouted: "A
kown in Venice, and the same patter repeated itself.                             miracle! a miraclef"
The stag, instead of
being punished, re­
Interpretation
ceived a handsome gift.
The young Cypriot Mamugna had lived in Venice for severa years before
Do but entertain a king
reinca                                                                           ating hirself as the alchemist Bragadino. He saw how gloom had            wilh dreams, flatter
him, and tell him a few
setled on the city, how everyone was hoping for a redemption from some
pleasant fantastic lies:
idefinite source. While other charlatans mastered everyday cons based on
whatever his indigna­
sleight of hand, Mamugna mastered human nature. With Venice as his tar­          tion against you may
get from  the  start,  he traveled  abroad,  made  some  money  through his      be, he will swallow the
bait, and make you his
achemy  scams, and then retured to  Italy,  setting up  shop  in  Brescia.
dearest friend.
There he created a reputation that he knew would spread to Venice. From
FABLES,
a distance, in fact, his aura of power would be all the more impressive.         JEAN DE LA FONTAINE.
                                                                                 1621-1695
At first Mamugna did not use vulgar demonstratons to convince peo-
                                                                                 LAW 3 2                                                                   265

pIe of his alchemie skiH, His sumptuous paace, his opulent garments, the
dink of gold in his hands, al these provided a superior argument to any­
If you want to tell lies
thing rationa. Ad these established the cyde that kept                        h                                                                            going: His ob­
that will be believed,
don't tell the truth                                                          vious wealth confirmed his reputaton as an achemist, so that patons like
that won 't.                                                                  the Duke of Mantua gave him money, which alowed him to live in weath,
EMPEROR TOKLJGAWA                                                             which reinforced his reputation as an alchemist, and so on. Only once this
IEYASU OE JAPAN,
SEVENTEENTH CENTURY                                                           reputation was established, ad dukes ad senators were fighting over hir,
did he resort to the                                                          tg necessity of a demonstration. By then, however,
people were easy to deceive: They wanted to believe. The Venetian sena­
tors who watched him multiply gold wanted to believe so badly that tey
failed to notce the glass pipe up his sleeve, from which he slipped gold
dust into his pinches of minerals. Brilliant and capricious, he was te a­
chemist of their fantasies-and once he had created an aura like this, no
one noticed his simple deceptions.
Such is the power of the fantasies that tae root in us, especialy in
times of scarcity and dedine. People rarely believe that teir problems
arise from their own misdeeds and stupidity. Someone or something out
there is to bl                                                                e-the other, the world, te gods-ad so savation comes
from the outside as weH. Had Bragadino arived in Venice armed wit a
detailed analysis of the reasons behind the city's economic dedine, and of
the had-nosed steps that it could tae to                                      t                                                                            tings around, he would
have been scomed. The reality was too ugly and te soluton too painfl­
mosty the kind of had work that te citizens' ancestors had mustered t
create an empire. Fantasy, on te oter hand-in this case the romance of
alchemy-was easy to understand and infinitely more palatable.
To    gan power, you must be a source of pleaure for tose aound
you-and  pleasure  comes  from  playing  to  people's  fantasies.  Never
promise a gradual improvement through had work; rather, promise te
moon, te great ad sudden transformation, the pot of gold.
No man need despair of gaining converts to the most extravagant
hypothesis who has art enough to represent it in favorable colors,
David Hume, 1 711-1 776
KEYS TO POWER
Fantasy can never operate aone. It requires the backdrop ofthe humdrum
and the mundane. It is the oppressiveness of realit tat allows fantasy to
take root and bloom. In siteent-century Venice, the reality was one of de­
dine and loss of prestige. The corresponding fatasy described a sudden
recovery of past glories trough the miracle of alcemy. While the reality
only got worse, te Venetas inhabited a happy dream world in which
their city restored its fabulous wealth and power ovemight, tuming dust
into gold.
The person who can spin a fantasy out of an oppressive reality has ac­
cess to untold power. A you search for the fantasy tat will take hold of te
266                                                                           LAW 32

masses, then, keep your eye on the banal truths that weigh heavily on us
all. Never be distracted by people's glamorous portraits of themselves and
teir lives; search and dig far what really imprisons them. Once you find
tat, you have the magical key that will put great power in your hands.
Although times and people change, let us examine a few of the oppres­
sive realities that endure, and the opportunites for power they provide:
T Reality: Change is slow and gradual. It requires hard work, a bit o[ luck, a[air
amount o[selsacrice, and a lot p[patience.
The Fantasy: A sudden transfrmation wil brin a total chane in one s frtunes,
bypassin work, luck, selsacrice, and time in one[antastic stroke.
This is of course the fantasy par excellence of the charlatans who
prowl among us to this day, and was the key to Bragadino's success.
Pomise a great and total change-from poor to rich, sickness to heath,
misery to ecstasy-and you will have followers.
How  did  the  great  sixteenth-century  German  quack  Leonhard
Thumeisser become the court physician for the Elector of Brandenburg
without ever studying medicine? Instead of offering amputations, leeches,
ad foul-tasting purgatives (the medicaments of the tme), Thumeisser of­
fered  sweet-tasting elixirs  ad  promised instant recovery.  Fashionable
courtiers especially wanted his solution of "drinkable gold," whic cost a
fortune. If some inexplicable illness assailed you, Thumeisser would con­
sult a horoscope and prescribe a talisma.  Who could resist such a
fatasy-health and well-being without sacrifice and pain!
The Reality: The social realm h hard-set codes and boundries. W understand
these limits and know that we have to move within the same[amiliar circes, dy in
and dy out.
The Fantasy: W can enter a totally new worl with dirent codes and the promise
o[ adventure.
In the early 1700s, all London was abuzz with talk of a mysterious
stanger, a young man named George Psalmanazar. He had arrived from
what was to most Englishmen a fantastical land: the island of Formosa
(now  Taiwan),  off  the  coast  of China.  Oxford  University  engaged
Psalmanazar to teach the island's language; a few years later he translated
te Bible into Formosan, then wrote a book-an immediate best-seIler-on
Formosa's history and geography. English royalty wined ad dined the
young man, and everywhere he went he entertained his hosts with won­
drous stories of his homelad, ad its bizare customs.
After Psalmanazar died, however, his will revealed that he was in fact
merely a Frenchman with a rich imaginaton. Everything he had said about
Formosa-its alphabet, its language, its literature, its entire culture-he had
invented. He had built on the English public's ignorance of the place to
concoct an elaborate story that flfilled their desire for the exotc and
LAW 32                                                                               267

strage. Britsh culture's rigid control of people's dangerous dreams gave
hir the perfect opportunity to exploit their fantasy.
The fantasy of the exotic, of course, can also skirt the sexual. It must
not come too elose, though, for the physical hinders the power of fantasy; it
can be seen, grasped, and then tired of-the fate of most courtesans. The
bodily charms of the mistress only whet the master's appette for more and
different pleasures, a new beauty to adore. To   bring power, fantasy must re­
main to some degree unrealized, literally unreal. The dancer Mata Hai,
for instance, who rose to public prominence in Paris before World War I,
had quite ordinary looks. Her power came from the fatasy she created of
being strage 'and exotc, unknowable and indedpherable, The taboo she
worked with was less sex itself than the breaking of sodal codes.
Another form of the fatasy of the exotic is simply the hope for relief
from boredom. Con atsts love to play on the oppressiveness of the work­
ing world, its lack of adventure. Their cons might involve, say, the recov­
ery of lost Spaish teasure, with the possible partidpaton of an alluring
Mexican seiorita and a connection to the president of a South American
country-aything offering release fom te humdrum.
The Realit: Societ isframented andfoll of conflict.
Te Fantas: People can come together in a mystical union ofsouls.
In the 1920s the con man Oscar Hartzell made a quick fortune out of
the age-old Sir Frands Drake swindle-basically promising any sucer who
happened to be suramed "Drae" a substatial shae of the long-lost
"Drake treasure," to which Hartzell had access. Thousands across the Mid­
west fell for the scam, which Hartzell eleverly tured into a crusade against
the goverment and everyone else who was trying to keep the Drake for­
tune out of the rightful hads of its heirs. There developed a mystca union
of the oppressed Drakes, with emotonal rallies and meetings. Pomise such
a union and you can gain much power, but it is a dangerous power that ca
easily tur against you. This is a fantasy for demagogues to play on.
The Realit: Death. The dead cannot be brought back, the past cannot be chaned.
Te Fantas: A sudden reversal ofthis intolerble fact.
This con has many variations, but requires great skill and subtlety.
The beauty and importance of the art of Vermeer have long been rec­
ognized, but his pantings are small in number, and are extremely rare. In
the 1930s, though, Vermeers began to appear on the art market. Experts
were called on to verif them, and pronounced them real. Possession of
these new Vermeers would crown a collector's caeer. It was like the resur­
recton of Lazarus: In a stange way, Vermeer had been brought back to
life. The past had been changed.
Only later did it come out that the new Vermeers were the work of a
middle-aged Dutch forger named Han van Meegeren. And he had chosen
268                                                                              LAW 32

Ver                                                                             eer for his scam because he understood fantasy: The paintngs would
seem real precisely because te public, and the experts as weIl, so desper­
ately wanted to believe they were.
Remember: The key to fantasy is distance. The distant has allure and
prmise,  seems  simple  and  problem  fee.  What you are  offering,  then,
should be ungraspable. Never let it become oppressively familiar; it is the
mirage in the distance, withdrawing as the sucker approaches. Never be
too direct in describing the fantasy-keep it vague. As a forger of fantasies,
let your victim come elose enough to see and be tempted, but keep hir fa
away enough that he stays dreaming and desiring.
Image:   The
Moon. Unattainable,
always  changing  shape,
disappearing  and  reappear­
ing. We look at it,  imagine,
wonder,  and  pine-never  fa­
miliar,  continuous provoker
of dreams. Do not offer
the obvious . Pomise
the  moon.
Authority : A lie is an allurement, a fabrication, that can be embell­
ished into a fantasy. It can be elothed in the raiments of a mystic
conception. Truth is cold, sober fact, not so comfortable to absorb.
A lie is more palatable. The most detested person in the world is
the  one  who  always  teIls  the  truth,  who  never romances
I found it far more interesting and profitable to romance than to
tell the truth .                                                                (Joseph Weil, a.k.a. "The Yellow Kid,"  1875-1976)
LAW 32                                                                          269

REVERSAL
If tere is power in tapping into the fantasies of te masses, there is also
danger. Fantasy usualy contains a element of play-te public half rea­
izes it is being duped, but it keeps te dream alive anyway, relishing the en­
tertanment and te temporary diversion fom te everyday tat you are
providing. S keep it light-never come too elose to the place where you
are actually expected to produce results. That place may prove extemely
hazardous.
After Bragadino  established hirself in Munieh, he  found  that the
sober-minded Bavarians had fa     less fath in  achemy than the  tempera­
mental Venetans. Only te duke really believed in it, for he needed it des­
perately to rescue him fom te hopeless mess he was in.  A Bragadino
played his familiar watng game, accepting gifts and expecting patence,
the public grew agry. Money was being spent and was yielding no results.
In 1592 the Bavarians demanded justce, and eventualy Bragadino found
hirself swinging from the gallows. As before, he had promised and had
not delivered, but this time he had misjudged te forbearance of his hosts,
and his inability to flfl teir fantasy proved fatal.
One last ting: Never mae the mistake of imagining that fantasy is al­
ways fantastical. It certainly contrasts wit reaity, but reality itself is some­
times  so teatrical and stylized tat fantasy be comes a desire for simple
tings. The image Abraham Lincoln created of hirself, for example, as a
homespun country lawyer with a bead, made him the common ma's
president.
P. T. B                                                                            aum created a successfl act wit Tom Thumb, a dwarf who
dressed up  as  famous  leaders  of  the  past,  suc  as  Napoleon,  and lam­
pooned them wickedly. The  show delighted everyone, right up to Queen
Victoria,  by  appealing to  the  fantasy  of te                                   te: Enough  of  the  v                                   a­
glorious rulers of history, te common man knows best. Tom Thumb re­
versed the familiar patter of fantasy in which the  strange and unnown
be comes  the  idea.  But the  act still  obeyed  the  Law,  for underlying it
was te  fantay that the simple man is  witout problems, and is  happier
tha te powerfl ad te rich.
Both Lincoln ad Tom Thumb played te  commoner but carefly
maintained their distance. Should you play wit such a fatasy, you too
must caeflly cultivate distance and not allow your "common" persona t
become too familiar or it                                                          w                                                        not project as fant   y.
270                                                                                LAW 32

LAW
33
DISCOVER EACH
MAN'S THU M B SCREW
JUDGMENT
Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That
weakness is usually     an insecurty,  an uncontrllable
emotion or need; it can also be a small secret plasure.
Either way, oncejound, it is a thumbscrew you can tur
to your advantage.
271

FINDING THE THUMBSCREW: A Strategie Plan ofActon
We    a have resistaces, We   live with a perpetua                                aor around oUfselves
T I I I·;  UO". TIIE
to defend against change and the intusive actions of fiends and rivals. We
ell·\ \101'. A') 1'1 1 1':  FOX
would like nothing more tha to be lef to do tngs our own way.  Con­
A !ion was chasing a
stantly butting up against tese resistaces will cost you a lot of energy.
chamois along a valley.
He had all but caught                                                             One of te most importat tngs to realize about people, though, is that
it, and with longing                                                              they al have a weakness, some pat of teir psychologica                           aor tat will
eyes was an ticipating a
not resist, tat will bend to your will if you find it and push on it. Some peo­
certain and a satüfying
pIe wear their weanesses openly, others disguise tem. Those who dis­
repast. It seered as if it
were utterly impossible                                                                                                                                            guise them  ae often te ones most effectively undone trough that one
for the victim to escape;                                                         chink in their                                                                   aor.
for a deep ravine
In planning YOUf assault, keep these principles in mind:
appeared tu bar the
way for both the hunter
and the hunted. Rut the                                                           Pay   Attention  to   Gestures  and  Unconscious   Signals.  As  Sigmund
nimble chamois, gath­                                                             Freud remarked, "No morta can keep a secret. If his lips are silent, he cat­
ering together all its
                                                                                  ters with his fingertps; betayal oozes out of hir at every pore." This is a
strength, shot like an
arrow from a bow                                                                  critica concept in te  search for a person's weaness-it is reveaed by
across the chasm, and                                                             seemingly unimportat ge stures and passing words.
slood still on the rocky                                                          The key is not only what you look for but where and how you look.
cliff on the other side.
Everyday conversaton supplies the richest mine of weanesses, so tan
Gur lion pulled up
short. Rut at that                                                                yourself to listen. Start by always seeming interested-the appeaance of a
moment a friend of his                                                            sympatetic ear will SpUf ayone to talk. A clever trick, often used by te
happened to be near at
nineteent-century French statesma Talleyrad, is to appear to open up to
hand. That friend was
te other person, to share a secret with tem. It ca be completely made
the fox.
" Whatl" said he, "with                                                           up,  or  it ca  be  real but  of no  great importance to you-te important
your strength and                                                                 thing is tat it should seer to come from the heart. This will usually elicit a
agility, is it possible
response tat is not only as frak as Y0ufS but more genuine                        a response
that you will yield to a
that reveas a weakness.
feeble chamois? You
have only to will, and                                                            If you suspect that someone has a particular soft spot, probe for it indi­
you will be able to                                                               rectly. If, for instace, you sense tat a man has a need to be loved, openly
work wonders. Though
flatter him. If he laps up Y0uf compliments, no matter how obvious, you
the abyss be deep, yet, if
are  on the right track.  Train Y0uf  eye  for  details-how  someone tps a
you are only in earnest,
I am certain you will                                                                                                                                              waiter, what delights a person, te hidden messages in clotes. Find peo­
clear it. Surely you can                                                          ple's idols, the tings they worship and                                          w                                                                         do anyting to get-perhaps
conjde in my disinter­
you  can be the supplier of teir fantasies. Remember: Since we all try to
ested friendship. I
hide Ouf weaknesses, tere is litte to be lea                                      ed fom Ouf conscious behav­
would not expose your
fife to danger if I were                                                          ior. What oozes out in te little tings outside Ouf conscious contol is what
not so weil aware of                                                              you want t know.
your strength and
dexterity. "
The /ion 's  blood waxed                                                          Find  te  Helpless  Ch                                                           d  Most weaknesses begin in childhood, before
hot, and began tu boil                                                            te self builds up compensatory defenses. Perhaps the child was pampered
in his veins. He fiung                                                            or indulged in a particular aea, or perhaps a certain emotional need went
himself with all his
unfullled; as he or she grows older, the indulgence or the deficiency may
might into space. Rut
be buried but never disappears. Knowing about a childhood need gives
he couid not c/ear the
chasm; so down he                                                                 you a powerfl key to a person's weakness.
tumbled headlong, and
One sign of tis weakness is that when you touch on it the person                  w
was killed by the fall.
often act like a child, Be on te lookout, then, for any behavior tat should
272                                                                               LAW 3 3

have been outgrown. If your victims or rivals went without something im­            Then what did his dear
friend do? He
portant, such as parental support, when they were cildren, supply it, or its
cautiously made his
facsimile. If they reveal a secret taste, a hidden indulgence, indulge it. In ei­
way down to the
ter case they will be unable to resist you.                                         bottom of the ravine,
and there, out in the
open space and the free
Look for  Contrasts.  An overt trait ofen conceals its opposite. People
air seeing that the !ion
who thump their chests are ofen big cowards; a prudish exterior may hide
wanted neitherfattery
a lascivious soul; the uptght are ofen screaming for adventure; the shy are         nor obedience now, he
dying for attention. By probing beyond appearances, you will ofen find              set to work to pay the
last sad rites to his
people's weanesses in the opposite of the qualites they reveal to you.
dead friend, and in a
month picked his bones
Find te Weak Link.  Sometimes i your seach for weaknesses it is not                 clean.
what but who that matters. In today's versions of the court, there is ofen          FABLES,
IVAN KRILOFF,
someone behind the scenes who has a great deal of power, a tremendous
1768-1844
influence  over the  person superficially on top.  These behind-the-scenes
powerbrokers are the group's weak link: Win their favor and you indirectly
influence the king. Altematively, even in a group of people actng with the
appearance of one will-a when a group und er attac closes ranks to resist
a                                                                                   outsider-there is always a weak link in the chain. Find the one person
who  will bend under pressure.
Fill te Void.  The two main emotonal voids to fill are insecurity and un­           lHVI!( LAZAB
happiness. The insecure ae suckers for any kind of social validaton; as for
                                                                                    [Hollywood super­
te chronicaly unhappy, look for the roots of their unhappiness. The inse            agent] /rving Paul
eure and the unhappy are the people least able to  disguise their weak­             Lazar was once
anxious to seil [studio
nesses. The ability to fill their emotonal voids is a great source of power,
mogul} Jack L. Warer
ad an indefinitely prolongable one.
a play. "/ had a long
meeting with him
Feed on Uncontrollable Emotons. The uncontrollable emotion can be                   today, " Lazar
explained [10 screen­
a paranoid fea-a fear disproportionate to the situaton-o                            r any base mo­
writer Garson Kanin],
tve such as lust, greed, vanity, or hatred. People in the grip of these emo­
"but / didn't mention
tons ofen canot control themselves, and you can do the contolling for               it, / didn 't even bring
tem.                                                                                it up."
" Why not? " / asked.
"Because I'm going to
wait until the weekend
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW                                                              after next, when / go to
Pa/m Springs. "
"[ don't understand. "
Observance I
" You don't? [ go to
In 1615 the thirty-year-old bishop of LUon, later known as Cadinal Riche­
Pa/m Springs every
Heu, gave a speech before representatves of the three estates of France­            weekend, but Warner
cergy, nobility, ad commoners. Ricelieu had been  chosen to serve as                isn't going this week­
end. He's got a preview
te mouthpiece for the clergy-an immense responsibility for a ma still
or something. So he:,
young and not particulaly well known. On all of the important issues of
not coming down till
te day, the speech followed the Churc line. But near the end of it Riche­           the next weekend, so
Heu did something that had nothing to do with the Church and everything             that's when Fm going
to bring it up. "
to do with his career. He tumed to the throne of the                                feen-yea-old King
"/rving, Fm more and
Louis XIII, ad to the Queen Mother Maie de' Medicis, who sat beside
LAW 3 3                                                                             273

more eonfused. "                                                                Louis, as te regent ruling France until her son reached his majority, Every­
"Look," said Irving
one expected Richelieu to say te usual kind words to te young king. In­
impatien tly, "[ know
stead, however, he looked directly at and only at te queen mother. Indeed
what l'm doing. [ know
IIW to seil Warner.                                                             his speech ended in long and flsome praise of her, praise so glowing tat it
This is a type of mate­                                                         actually offended some in the Church. But the smile on the queen's face as
rial that he :,. uneasy
she lapped up Richelieu's compliments was unforgettable.
with, so I have to hit
A yea later the queen mother appointed Ricelieu secretary of state
him with it hant and
suddenly 10                                                                     for foreign affairs, a incredible coup for the young bishop. He had now
get an okay. "                                                                  entered the inner cirele of power, and he studied te workings of the court
"But why Palm
as if it were the machinery of a watch. A Italian,  Concino  Concini, was
Springs? "
the queen mother's favorite, or rater her lover, a role that made hir per­
"Because in Palm
Springs, every day he                                                           haps the most powerfl man in France. Concini was vain and foppish, and
goes 10 Ihe bath" al The
Richelieu played him perfectly-attending to him as if h were the king.
Spa. And Iha!'s where
Witin  monts  Richelieu  had  become  one   of  Concini's  favorites.  But
l 'm going 10 be when
he's Ihere. Now there's                                                         someting  happened  in   1617 that  tured  everything  upside  down:  the
a Ihing aboul lack: He 's                                                       young king, who up untl then had shown every sign of being an idiot, had
eighly ami he's very                                                            Concini murdered and his most important associates imprisoned,  In so
vain, and he doesn'l
                                                                                doing Louis took command of the  county with one blow, sweeping te
like people 10 see him
naked. So when I walk                                                           queen moter aside.
up to him naked al The                                                          Had Richelieu played it wrong? He had been elose to both Concini
Spa-I mean he's
and Marie de Medicis, whose advisers and ministers were now all out of
naked-well, l'm
favor, some even arested. The queen moter herself was  shut up in te
naked 100, but I don't
care who sees me. He                                                            Louvre, a virta prisoner. Richelieu wasted no time. If everyone was de­
does. And I walk up to                                                          serting Marie de Medicis, he would stand by her. He knew Louis could not
him naked, and [ starl
get rid of her, for the king was stll very young, and had in any case always
to talk 10 him aboul
been inordinately attached to  her.  As  Marie's  only remaining powerfl
Ihis thing, he 'lI be very
embarrassed. And                                                                fiend,  Richelieu filled the valuable function of liaison between the king
he'lI wanl 10 gel away                                                          and his moter. In retur he received her protection, and was able to sur­
from me, and Ihe easi­
vive the paace coup, even to thrive. Over the  next few years the queen
esl way is to say . Yes, ,
mother grew stll more dependent on hir, and in 1622 she repaid hir for
bccause he knows if he
says 'No, ' then I'm                                                            his loyalty: Through the intercession of  her alies in  Rome, Richelieu was
going to stick wilh him,                                                        elevated to te powerfl rank of cardina.
ami slay righl on il, and
By  1623 King Louis was in touble. He had no one he could trust to
not give up. So 10 gel
advise hir, and altough he    was now a young man instead of a boy, he    re­
rid ofme, he'lI proba­
bly say, 'Yes. ' "                                                              mained childish in spirit, and affairs of state came hard to hir. Now tat he
Two weeks laler, I read                                                         had taken te    trone, Marie was no longer the regent and theoretically had
of Ihe aequisilion of
no  power, but she still had her son's ear,  and  she  kept telling him that
Ihis partieular properly
Richelieu was his  only possible savior. At fst Louis would have none of
by Warer Brolhers. I
phoned Lazar and                                                                it-he hated the cardina with a passion, only tolerating him out of love for
asked how it had been                                                           Marie. In    the end, however, isolated in     te    court and crippled by    his ow
aecomplished. "How
indecisiveness, he yielded t his mother and made Ricelieu first his chief
do you Ihink ? "  he
councilor and later prime minister.
asked. "In Ihe buf!
Iha!'s how . . . jusl Ihe                                                       Now Richelieu no longer needed Marie de Medicis. He stopped visit­
way [ told you il was
ing and courting her, stopped listening to her opinions, even argued wit
going 10 work. "
her ad opposed her wishes. Instead he concentrated on the king, making
10LLYWOOO.
himself indspensale to his new master. All the previous premiers, under­
GARSON KANIN.
1974                                                                            standing the king's childishness, had tried to keep him out of trouble; te
274                                                                             LAW 3 3

srewd  Richelieu played hir differently, deliberately pushing hir into
one                                                                           abitious  project  afer   another,   such   as   a   crusade  against  the
'1' 1 1 1' L T T I  F TI I I \ C S
Huguenots  and finally an  extended  war  with  Spain.  The immensity of
COI 'Y/,
tese projects only made the king more dependent on his powerfl pre­
As time went on I came
mier, the only man able to keep order in the realm. And so, for the next
to laok for Ihe liftle
eighteen years, Richelieu, exploitng the king's weaknesses, govemed and       weaknesses                                                                   lt's the
molded France according to his own vision, unifing the country and ma­        tiftle things that count.
On one occasion, I
ing it a strong European power for centuries to come.
worked on the presi­
Interpretation
dent of a large hank in
Richelieu saw everyting as a militay ca                                       paign, and no strategie move                                                 Omaha. The [phonyJ
deal invalved the
was more important to hir tha discovering his enemy's weaknesses and
purehase of the street
applying pressure to them. As early as his speech in 1615, he was looking
railway system of
for the weak link in the chain of power, and he saw that it was the queen     Omaha, including a
mother. Not that Marie was obviously weak-she govemed both France             hridge across the
ad her son; but Richelieu saw that she was really a insecure woman who        Mississippi River, My
                                                                              principals were suppa,\­
needed constant masculine attention. He showered her with affection and
                                                                              edly German and I had
respect, even toadying up to her favorite, Concini. He knew the day would     to negotiate wilh
come when the king would take over, but he also recognized that Louis         Bertin. While awaiting
word from ther I
loved his mother dearly and would always remain a child in relation to her.
introduced my fake
The way to control Louis, then, was not by gaining his favor, which could
mining-stack proposi­
change ovemight, but by gaining sway over his mother, for whom his af­        tion, Since this man
fection would never change.                                                   was rich, I decided 10
play for high stakes. . , .
Once Richelieu had the position he desired-prime minister-he dis­
Mean while, I played
carded the queen mother, moving on to the next weak link in the cain:
golf with the banker,
te king's own character. There was a part of hir that would always be a       visited his home, and
helpless child in need of higher authority. 1t was on the foundation of the   went to the theater wilh
him and his wife.
king's weakness that Richelieu established his own power and fare.
Though he showed
Remember: When entering the court, find the weak link. The person
same interest in my
in control is often not the king or queen; it is someone behind the scenes­   stock deal, he still
te favorite, the husband or wife, even the court fool. This person may        wasn'l convinced, I had
built it up to the point
have more weaknesses than the king hirself, because his power depends
that an investment af
on al kinds of capricious factors outside his control.
$1,250,000 was
Finally, when dealing with helpless children who cannot make deci­            required. Ofthis I was
sions, play on their weakness and push them into bold ventres. They will      to put up $900,000, Ihe
banker $350,000. Sut
have to depend on you even more, for you will become the adult fgure
still he hesitated.
whom they rely on to get them out of scrapes ad to safety.                    One evening when J
was at his home for
Observance I I                                                                dinner J ware same
perfume-CoIY : "April
In December of 1925, guests at the swankiest hotel in Palm Beach, Florida,
Violets. " It was not then
watched with interest as a mysterious ma arrived in a Rolls-Royce driven
considered effeminate
by a Japanese chauffeur. Over the next few days they studied this hand­       for a man to use a dash
of perfume. The
same man, who walked with a elegant cane, received telegrams at all
banker's wife  thought il
hours, and only engaged in the b riefest of conversations. He was a count,
very lavely. "Where did
                                                                              tey heard, Count Victor Lustig, ad he came from one of the weathiest         you get iI? "
fa                                                                            ilies in Europe-but this was all they could find out.                        "It is a rare blend, "
I told her, "especially
1magine their                                                                 aazement, then, when Lustg one day walked up to
made for me hy a
one of the least distinguished guests in the hotel, a Mr. Herman Loller,
LAW 3 3                                                                       275

French perfumer Do                                                               head of an engineering company, and entered into conversation with                    h
you like it? "
LoUer had made his fortune only recently, ad forging social connectons
"J love it, " she replied.
was very important to                                                            h                                                                                     .    He feit honored and somewhat intimidated by
The following day J
wenl lhrough my                                                                  this sophisticated man, who spoke perfect English with a hint of a foreign
effeels and found two                                                            accent. Over the days to come, the two became fiends.
empty boules. 80lh had
LoUer of course did most of te talking, and one night he confessed
come from Franc'e, but
that his business was doing poorly, wit more toubles ahead. In ret               ,
were empty. J wenl to a
downtown deparlment                                                              Lustig   confided   in   his   new   fiend   that  he   too   had   serious   money
slore and purchased                                                              problems-Communists had seized his family estate and aU its assets. He
ten ounces ofCoty '.
was too old to    lea                                                            a trade and go     to    work. Lucily he had found an a­
"April Violels. " J
swer-"a money-making machine." "You counterfeit?" LaUer whispered in
poured this into the
two French boules,                                                               half-shock. No, Lustg replied, explaining that trough a secret chemical
carefully sealed them,                                                           process, his machine could duplicate ay paper currency with complete ac­
wrapped them in
curacy. Put in a doUar bill and six hours later you had two, both perfect. He
tissue paper.
proceeded to    explain how the machine had been smuggled out of Europe,
That evening J dropped
by the banker'.I· home                                                           how te Germas had developed it to undermine the Britsh, how it had
anti presented the two
supported te count for severa years, and on and on.                              Wen LaUer insisted
bottles 10 his wife.
on a demonstation, the to men went to Lustig's room, where the count
" They were especially
pul up for me in                                                                 produced a magnificent mahogany box fitted wit slots, cranks, and dials.
Cologne," J lolcl her.                                                           Loller watched as  Lustg inserted a dollar  bill in the box. Sure enough,
The nexl day the                                                                 early the foUowing moming Lustig puUed out two bills, stiU wet from the
banker called al my
chemicals.
hotel. His wife   was
enraplured by lhe                                                                Lustig gave the notes to LaUer, who immediately took the bills to a
perfume. She consid­                                                             loca bank-which accepted tem as genuine. Now the businessman fever­
ered it lhe mosl
ishly begged Lustig to sell hir a machine. The count explained that there
wonderful, the most
was only one in existence, so Loller made hir a high offer: $25,000, then a
exolic fragrance "he
had ever used. J did not                                                         considerable amount  (more  tha  $400,000 in  today's  terms) .  Even so,
tell the banker he could                                                         Lustig seemed reluctant: He did not feel right about making his friend pay
get all he wanted right
so much. Yet finally he  agreed to the sale. Afer all, he  said, "I  suppose i
in Omaha.
matters little what you pay me. You  are, after  all, going to  recover te
"She said, " Ihe banker
added, "that J was                                                               amount within a few days by  duplicatng your own bills." Making LoUer
j(Jrlllnale to be associ­                                                        swea never to reveal the machine's existence to oter people, Lustig ac­
[ed with a man like
cepted the money. Later te same day he checked out of the hotel. A yea
you. " From then on his
later, afer many futile attempts at duplicatng bills, LaUer finaUy went to
attitude was changed,
for he had complele                                                                                                                                                    te police wit the story of how Count Lustg had conned hir with a pa
faith in his wife 's judg­                                                                                                                                             of doUar bills, some chemicals, and a worthless mahogany box.
ment                                                                             He parted
Interpretation
with $350,OO(. Thio,
Count Lustig had an eagle eye for oter people's weaknesses. He saw them
incidentally was my
biggest [con] score.                                                                                                                                                   in te  smalest gesture.  LaUer, for  instace,  overtipped waiters, seemed
"' Y E LLOW K I D "  W E I L,                                                                                                                                          nervous in conversation with the concierge, talked loudly about his busi­
1 875                                                                            1976
ness. His weakness, Lustg knew, was his need for social vaidation and for
the respect that he thought his wealth had ea                                    ed hir. He   was aso chroni­
cally insecure. Lustig had come to the hotel to hunt for prey. In LaUer he
homed in     on    the perfect sucer-a ma hungering for someone to    fill his
psychic voids.
In offering LoUer his friendship, then, Lustg knew he was offering him
te immediate respect of the oter guests. As a count, Lustg was aso offer-
276                                                                              LAW 33

ig the newly rich businessman access to the glittering world of old weath.
Ad for the coup de gräce, he apparenty owned a machine that would res­
And while I am on the
eue Laller from his worries. It would even put hir on a par with Lustg
subject, there is another
hirself, who had also used the machine to maintain his status. No wonder          fact that deserves
Loller took the bait.                                                             mention. It is this. A
man shows his charae­
Remember: When searching for sucers, always look for the dissatis­
ter just in the way in
led, the unhappy, the insecure. Such people are riddled with weaknesses
which he deals with
ad have needs that you ca f. Their neediness is the groove in which               trifles-for then he is
you place your thumbnail and tur them at will.                                    off his guard. This will
often afford a good
opportunity ofohserv­
Observance III
ing ehe boundless
In the year 1559, the French king Henri II died i n  a jousting exhibition. His   egoism of a man's
son assumed the throne, becoming Francis II, but in the background stood          nature, and his total
lack of consideration
Henri's wife and queen, Catherine de' Medicis, a woman who had long
for others; and if these
ago   proven her skill in affairs of state. When Francis died the next year,
defcets show them­
Catherine took control of the county as regent to her next son in line of         selves in small things,
or merely in his general
sueeession, the fture Charles IX, a mere ten years old at the time.
demeanour you will
The main threats to the queen's power were Antoine de Bourbon, king
find that they also
of Navarre, and his brother, Louis, the powerfl prince of Cande, both of          underhe his action in
whom could elaim the right to serve as regent instead of Catherine, who,          matters of importancc,
although he may
ater all, was Italian-a foreigner.  Catherine quickly appointed Antoine
disguise the fact. This ü
lieutenant general of the kingdom, a title that seemed to satsf his ambi­
an opportl/nity whieh
ton. It also meat that he had to remain in court, where Catherine could           should not he missed.
keep an eye on hir. Her next move proved smarter stll: Antoine had a              Ifin the liule affairs of
every day-the trifes of
notorious weakness for young women, so she assigned one of her most at­
life . . . -a man is
taetive maids of honor, Louise de Rouet, to seduce hir. Now Antoine's
ineonsiderate and seeks
intmate, Louise reported all of his actions to Catherine. The move worked         only what is advanta­
so  brilliatly  that  Catherine  assigned  another  of her  mads  to  Pince       geous or convenient to
himselJ to the preju­
Conde, and thus was formed her escadron volnt                                     "flying squadron"-of
dice of others ' rights; if
young girls whom she used to keep the unsuspectng males in the court
he appropriates to
uder her contol.                                                                  hirnself that which
In 1572 Catherine married off her daughter, Marguerite de Valois, to              helongs to a/l alike, you
may he sure there is no
Henri, the son of Antoine and the new king of Navarre. To   put a family that
justiee in his heart, ami
had always struggled against her so elose to power was a dangerous move,
that he would be a
so to  make sure of Henri's loyalty she unleashed on hir the loveliest mem­       seoundrel on a whole­
ber of her "flying squadron," Charlotte de Beaune Semblan ay, baroness            sale scale, only that law
and compulsion hind
of Sauves. Catherine did this even though Henri was married to her daugh­
his hands.
ter. Within weeks, Marguerite de Valois wrote in her memoirs, "Mme. de
A RT H U R
Sauves so completely ensnaed my husbad that we no longer slept to­                SCHOPENHAUER,
1 788-1 860
gether, nor even conversed."
The baoness was a excellent spy and helped to keep Henri under
Catherine's thumb. When the queen's youngest son, the Duke of Alen  on,
gew so elose to Henri that she feared the two might plot against her, she
asigned the baroness to hir as weIl. This most infa                               ous member of the
flying squadron quickly seduced Alen  on, and soon the two young men
fought over her and their friendship quickly ended, aong with any danger
of a conspiracy.
LAW 33                                                                            277

Interpretation
Catherine had seen very early on the sway that a mistress has over a man
'1' 1 1 1': BATT ! . E                                                          ,lI
of power: Her own husband, Henri 11, had kept one of the most infamous
PIIAHSALLI
mistresses of them all, Diane de Poiters_ What Catherine lea                    ed from the
When the two armies
experience was that a man like her husband wanted to feel he could win a
[Julius Caesar's and
Pompey 'sj were come                                                                                                                                                                    woman over without having to rely on his status, which he had inherited
into Pharsalia, and                                                                                                                                             rather than ea          ed_ And such a need contained a huge blind spot: As long
both eneamped there,
                                                                                                                                                                                        as the woman began the affair by acting as if she had been conquered, the
Pompey 's  thoughts ran
the same way as they                                                                                                                                                                    ma would fail to notice that as tme passed the mistress had come to hold
had done before,                                                                                                                                                                        power over hir, as Diane de Poitiers did over Henri_ It was Catherine's
against fighting. , , , But                                                                                                                                                             strategy to tur this weakness to her avantage, using it as a way to conquer
those who were about
                                                                                                                                                                                        and control men. All she had to do was unleash the loveliest women in the
him were greatly confi­
dent of ;'eeess . . . as if                                                                                                                                                             court,  her  "flying squadron," on  men whom  she knew shared her hus­
they had already                                                                                                                                                band's vulnerability.
conquered                                                                       The
Remember: Always look for passions and ob sessions that cannot be
cavalry especially were
controlled. The stronger the passion, the more vulnerable the person. This
obstinate for fghting,
being splendid/y armed                                                          may seem surprising, for passionate people look stong. In fact, however,
and brave/y mounted,                                                            they are simply filling the stage with their theaticality, distracting people
and valuing themselves
from how weak and helpless they really are. A man's need to  conquer
upon the fine horses
women actually reveals a tremendous helplessness that has made suckers
they kept, and upon
their own handsome                                                              out of them for thousads of years. Look at the part of a person that is most
persons; as also upon                                                           visible-their greed, their lust,  their  intense fear. These are the emotions
the advantage of their
they ca                                                                         ot conceal, and over which they have the least contol. And what
numbers, for they were
people cannot contol, you can control for them.
five thousand against
one thollsand of
Caesar:,·. Nor were the                                                         Observance IV
numbers ofthe infantry
Arabella  Huntington,  wife  of the great  late-nineteenth-century  railroad
less disproportionate,
magnate  Collis  P.   Huntington,  came  from  humble  origins  and  always
there being forty-five
thollsand of Pompey :,.                                                         struggled for social recognition among her wealthy peers. When she gave a
against twenty-two                                                              party in her San Francisco mansion, few of the social elite would show Upj
thousand ofthe enemy.
most of them took her for a gold digger, not their kind. Because of her hus­
[The next dayj whi/st
band's fabulous wealth, art dealers courted her, but with such condescen­
the infantry was thus
sharp/y engaged in the                                                          sion they obviously saw her as an upstat. Only one man of consequence
main battle, on the                                                             treated her differently: the dealer Joseph Duveen.
flank Pompey 's  horse
For the first few years of Duveen's relationship with Arabella, he made
rode up confidently,
no effort to seIl expensive at to her. Instead he accompanied her to fe
ami opened [his
cavalry :'1 ranks very                                                          stores, chatted endlessly about queens and princesses he knew, on and on.
wide, that they might                                                           At last, she thought, a man who treated her as an equal, even a superior, in
surround the right wing
high society. Meanwhile, ifDuveen did not try to seIl art to her, he did sub­
of Caesar. But before
tly educate her in his aesthetic ideas-namely,  that the best art was  the
they engaged, Caesar :,
cohorts rushed out ami                                                          most expensive at. And after Arabella had  soaked up his way of seeing
attaeked them, and did                                                          things, Duveen would act as if she always had exquisite taste, even though
not dart their ja velins
before she met hir her aesthetcs had been abysmal.
at a distanee, nor strike
at the thighs and legs,                                                         When Collis Huntngton died, in  1900, Arabella came into a fortune.
as they uSllally did in                                                         She   suddenly  started  to  buy  expensive  paintngs,   by  Rembrandt  and
close battle, but aimed
Veläzquez, for example-ad only from Duveen. Years later Duveen sold
at their faees. For thus
her Gainsborough's Blue Boy for the highest price ever paid for a work of
278                                                                             LAW 33

a at the time, an astounding purchase for a family that previously had            Caesar had instructed
them, in hopes that
shown little interest in collectng.
young gentlemen, who
Interpretation
had not known much
Joseph Duveen instantly understood Arabella Huntngton and what made               ofbaltles and wounds,
her tick: She wanted to feel important, at hore in society. Intensely inse­       but came wearing their
hair long, in ehe jower
eure about her lower-class background, she  needed  confirmation of her
of their age and height
new social status. Duveen waited. Instead of rushing into trying to per­
of their beauty, would
suade her to collect at, he subtly went to work on her weaknesses. He             be more apprehensive
made her feel that she deserved his attention not because she was the wife        ofsuch blows, and not
                                                                                  care for hazarding both
of one of the wealthiest men in the world but because of her own special
                                                                                  a danger at present and
eharacter-and this completely melted her. Duveen never condescended               a blemish for the
to ArabeIla; rather than lecturing to her, he instilled his ideas in her indi­    future.
reetly. The result was one of his best and most devoted clients, ad also the      And so it proved, for
                                                                                  they were so far from
sae of Te Blue Boy.
                                                                                  bearing the stroke of
People's need far validaton and recognition, teir need to feel impor­             the javelim; that they
tt, is the best kind of weakness to exploit. First, it is almost universa; sec­   eould not stand the
sight ofthem, but
ond, exploiting it is so very easy. A you have to do is find ways to make
tured about, ami
people feel better about their taste , their soda standing, their intelligence.
eovered their faces to
Once the fish are hooked, you  can reel them in  again  ad  again,  for           seeure them. Onee in
years-you are filling a positve role, giving them what they cannot get on         disorder, presently they
tured about to jy; and
teir own. They may never suspect that you are                                     tng them like a thumb­
so most shamefully
serew, and if they do they may not care, because you are making them feel
ruined alf. For those
better about themselves, and that is worth any price.                             who had beat them
hack at onee
outjanked the infantry,
Observance V
and falling on their
In 1862 King William of Pussia named Otto von Bismarck premier and
rear, cut ehem to pieces.
minister for foreign affairs. Bismarck was known for his boldness, his ambi­      Pompey, who
ton-and his interest in strengtening the military. Since William was sur­         eommanded the other
wing ofthe army, when
rounded by liberals in his govemment and cabinet, politidans who already
he saw his cavalry thus
wated to limit his powers, it was quite dangerous for hir to put Bismack
broken and fying, was
                                                                                  in this sensitive position. His wife, Queen Augusta, had tied to dissuade   no longer himself; nor
                                                                                  hir, but although she usualy got her way with hir, this time William        did he now remember
                                                                                                                                                              that he was Pompey the
stck to his                                                                       gs.
                                                                                                                                                              Great, but, like one
                                                                                  Only a week after becoming prime minister, Bismarck made an im­
                                                                                                                                                              whom some god had
                                                                                  promptu speech to a few dozen ministers to convince them of the need to     deprived ofhis senses,
                                                                                  enlarge the army. He ended by saying,  "The  great questions of the time    retired to his tent with­
out speaking a word,
will be dedded, not by speeches and resolutions of majorites, but by iron
and there sat to expect
ad blood." His speech was immediately disseminated throughout Ger­
the event, till the whole
many. The queen screamed at her husband that Bismarck was a barbaric              army was routed.
militarist who was out to usurp contol of Pussia, and that William had to         TE LlFE OF JULlllS
CAESAR.
lre hir. The liberals in the govemment agreed with her. The outcry was
PUJARCH,
so vehement that WiIliam began to be                                              aaid he would end up on a scaf­                                             C. A.D. 46-120
fold, like Louis XVI of France, if he kept Bismarck on as prime minister.
Bismarck knew he had to get to the king befare it was too late. He also
knew he had blundered, and should have tempered his fiery words. Yet as
he contemplated his strategy, he decided not to apologize but to do the
exact opposite. Bismarck knew the king weIl.
LAW 33                                                                            279

When the two men met, William, predictably, had been worked into a
tizzy by te queen. He reiterated his fear of being guillotned. But Bismarc
only replied, "Yes, then we shall be dead! We   must die sooner or later, and
could there be a more respectable way of dying? I should die fighting for
the cause of my king and master. Your Majesty would die sealing wit your
own blood your royal rights grated by God's grace. Whether upon the
scaffold or upon the battlefield makes no difference to the glorious staking
of body ad life on behaf of rights granted by God's grace !" On he went,
appealing to William's sense of honor ad the majest of his position a
head of the army. How could te king allow people to push hir around?
Wasn't the honor of Germay more important than quibbling over words?
Not only did the prime minister convince the king to stand up to both his
wife  and his parliament, he persuaded hir to build up  the army-Bis­
mack's goa all along.
Interpretation
Bismarck knew the king feIt buHied by those around hir. He knew that
William had a military background and a deep sense of honor, and that he
feit ashamed at his cravenness before his wife and his goverment. William
secretly yea                                                                    ed to be a great and mighty king, but he daed not express
this ambiton because he was afad of ending up like Louis XVI. Where a
show of courage often conceals a man's timidity, William's tmidity con­
ceaed his need to show courage and thump his chest.
Bismarck sensed the longing for glory beneath William's pacifist front,
so  he  played to te king's insecurity about his  manhood, finaHy pushing
hir into tree wars and the creation of a German empire. Timidity is a po­
tent weakness to exploit. Timid souls often yea                                 to be their opposite-to
be Napoleons. Yet tey lack the inner strength. You, in  essence, can  be­
come  their  Napoleon,  pushing them  into  bold  actions  that  serve  YOU
needs while also making tem dependent on you. Remember: Look to the
opposites ad never take appearances at face value.
Image:  The
Thumbscrew.
Yo u r   e n e m y
has secrets that
he guards, thinks
thoughts he will
not  reveal.  But
they come out  in
ways  he  cannot
help. It is there some­
where,   a  groove  of
weakness  on  his  head,
at  h i s  h e art,  o v e r  h i s
beHy.  Once you find the
groove, put YOUf thumb in
i t  a n d  t u r n  h i r   a t  w i l l.
280                                                                             LAW 33

Authority: Find out each man's thumbscrew. 'Tis the art of setting their
wills  in  action.  It needs  more  skill  than  resolution.  You  must  know
where to get at anyone. Every volition has a special motive which varies
according to taste. All men are idolaters,  some of fare, others of self­
interest, most of pleasure. Skill consists in knowing these idols in order
to bring them into  play.  Knowing any  man's  mainspring of motive
you have as it were the key to his will. (Baltasar Graciän,  1601- 1658)
REVERSAL
Playing on people's weaness has one significat danger: You may stir up
a acton you cannot control.
In YOUf games of power you always look several steps ahead ad plan
accordingly. And you exploit the fact that other people are more emotonal
and incapable of such foresight. But when you play on their vulnerabilites,
the  areas over which they have least control, you can unleash emotions
that will upset YOUf plans. Psh timid people into bold acton ad they may
go too far; answer their need for attention or recognition and they may
need more than you wat to give them. The helpless, childish element you
ae playing on can tr against you.
The more emotional the weaness, the greater the potental danger.
Know the limits to this game,  then,  ad never get carried away by your
contol over YOUf victms. You are ater power, not te thrill of control.
LAW 3 3                                                                         281

LAW
34
BE ROYAL IN YOUR OWN
FASHI ON : ACT LIKE A
KING TO B E  TREATE D
LIKE ONE
JUDGMENT
The way you carry yoursel will often deterine how you
are treated: In the long rn, appearng vulgar or com­
mon will make peol disrespect you. For a king respects
himsel and inspires the same sentiment in others. By
acting regally and confident 0/ your powers, you make
yoursel seem destined to wear a crown.
282

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In July of  1830, a revolution  broke  out in  Paris  that forced  the king,
Never lose your
Chales X, to abdicate. A commission of the highest authorities in the land
selfrespect, nor be too
gatered  to   choose  a  successor,  and  the  man  they  picked  was  Louis­   familiar with yourself
Philippe, the Duke of Orleans.                                                  .  when you are ahme.
Let your integrity itself"
From the beginning it was clear that Louis-Philippe would be a differ­
be your own standard
ent kind of king, and not just because he came from a different branc of
of rectitude, and be
te royal family, or because he had not inherited te crown but had been          more indebted to the
gven it, by a commission, putting his legitmacy in question. Rather it was      severity ofyour own
                                                                                judgment ofyourself
tat he  disliked  ceremony  and  the  trappings  of royalty;  he  had  more
                                                                                than to all external
fends among the bankers than among the nobility ; and his style was not         precepts. Desist from
t create a new kind of royal rule, as Napoleon had done, but to downplay        unseemly conduct,
his status, the better to  mix with the businessmen and middle-class folk       rather out of respect
for your own virtue
who had called hir to lead. Thus the symbols that came to be associated
than for the strictures
wt Louis-Philippe were neither the scepter nor the crown, but the gray
of exteral authority.
hat and umbrella with which he would proudly wak the steets of Paris, as        Come to hold yourself
in awe, and you will
i he were a bourgeois out for a stroll. When Louis-Philippe invited James
have no need of
Rotschild, the most important banker in France, to his paace, he treated
Seneca 's imaginary
hm as an equal. And unlike any king before hir, not only did he talk busi­      tutor.
ness with Monsieur Rothschild but that was literally all he talked, for he      BAlASAR GRACIAN,
1 601 - 1 658
loved money and had amassed a huge fortune.
As the reign of the "bourgeois king" plodded on, people came to de­
spise hir . The aristocracy could not endure the sight of a unkingly king,
ad within a few years they tumed on hir. Meanwhile the growing class of
te poor, including the radicals who had chased out Charles X, found no
satsfaction in a ruler who neither acted as a king nor govemed as a ma of
te people. The bankers to whom Louis-Philippe was the most beholden
soon realized that it was they who controlled the country, not he, and they
teated hir with growing contempt. One day, at the start of a train trip or­
gnized for the royal family, James Rothschild actualy berated him-and
i public-for being late.  Once the king had made news by treatng the
banker as a equal ; now the baker treated the king as an inferior.
Eventually the workers'  insurrections that had brought down Louis­
Philippe's predecessor began to reemerge, and the king put them down
wit force. But what was he defending so brutally? Not the insttution of the
monarchy, which he disdained, nor a democratic republic, which his rule
prevented. What he was really defending, it seemed, was his own fortune,
ad the fortunes of the bankers-not a way to inspire loyalty among the
citzenry.
In early 1848, Frenchmen of all classes began to demonstate for elec­
tra reforms that would make the county tuly democratic. By February
te  demonstrations  had tumed violent.  To    assuage the populace,  Louis­
Philippe fired his prime minister and appointed a liberal as a replacement.
But this created the opposite of the desired effect: The people sensed they
could push the king around. The demonstatons tumed into a fll-fledged
revolution, with gunfire and barricades in the steets.
LAW 34                                                                          283

On the  night of February  23, a crowd  of Parisians  surrounded the
palace.  With   a  suddenness   that   caught   everyone   by   surprise,   Louis­
Philippe abdicated that very evening and fled to Englad. He lef no suc­
cessor, nor even the suggestion of one-his whole goverment folded up
and dissolved like a traveling circus leaving town.
Interpretation
Louis-Philppe  consciously  dissolved  the  aura tat naturally pertains  to
kings and leaders. Scoffing at     the symbolism of    grandeur, he     believed a
new world was dawning, where rulers should act and be like ordinary cit­
zens. He was right: A new world, without kings and queens, was certainly
on its way. He was profoundly wrong, however, in predicting a change in
the dynamics of power.
The bourgeois king's hat and umbrella amused the French at first, but
soon grew irritating. People knew that Louis-Philippe was  not really like
them at al-tat the hat and umbrella were essentally a kind of trick to en­
courage them in the fantasy that the country had suddenly grown more
equal. Actually,  though,  the divisions of wealth  had never been greater.
The French expected their ruler to be a bit of a showman, to have some
presence. Even a radical like Robespierre, who had briefly come to power
during the French Revolution fifty yeas earlier, had understood this, and
certainly Napoleon, who had                                                               ted te revolutionary republic into an im­
perial regime, had known it in his bones. Indeed as soon as Louis-Philippe
fled   the   stage,   the   French   revealed   their   true   desire:   They   elected
Napoleon's grand-nephew president. He was a virtual unknown, but they
hoped he  would re-create  the  great genera's powerfl aura,  erasing the
awkwad memory of the "bourgeois king."
Powerfl people may be tempted to affect a common-man aura,                                ting
to create the illusion that they and their subjects or underlings are basically
the same. But the people whom this false ge sture is intended to impress will
quickly see trough it. They understand that they are not being given more
power-that it only appears as if they shared in the powerful person's fate.
The only kind of common touch that works is the kind afected by Franklin
Roosevelt, a style that sad the president shared values and goals with the
common people even while he  remained a patician at heart.  He  never
pretended to erae his distance from te crowd.
Leaders who ty to dissolve tat distance through a false chumminess
gradually lose the ability to inspire loyalty, fear, or love. Instead they elicit
contempt. Like Louis-Philippe, they are too uninspiring even to be worth
the guillotine-the best they can do is simply vanish in the night, as if they
were never there.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
When Christopher Columbus was tying to find fnding for his legenda
voyages, may around hir believed he came from the ltalian aristocracy.
This view was passed into history through a biography written after the ex­
plorer's death by his son, which describes hir as a descendat of a Count
284                                                                                       LAW 3 4

Colombo of the Castle of Cuccaro in Montferrat. Colombo in tur was said
to   be descended from the legendary Roman general Colonius, and two of
HII'f'OCLLIIlE" ,\'I'
his first cousins were supposedly direct descendants of an emperor of Con­
SlCYO\
statnople. An ilIustrious bacground  indeed.  But it was nothing more
In the next generation
ta ilIustrious fantasy, for Columbus was actually the son of Domenico
the family became
Colombo, a humble weaver who had opened a wine shop when Christo­                much more famous
pher was a young man, ad who then made his living by seIling cheese.             than before through the
distinction conferred
Columbus hirself had created the myth of his noble bacground, be­
upon it by Cleisthenes
cause from early  on he feit that destiny had singled hir out for great
the master of5icyon.
tings, and that he had a kind of royalty in his blood. Accordingly he acted      Cleisthenes ' . . had a
a if he were indeed descended from noble stock. After an uneventfl ca­           daughter, Agarista,
whom he wished to
reer as  a merchant on a commercial vessel,  Columbus,  originally fom
marry to the hest man
Genoa,  settled in  Lisbon.  Using the  fabricated story of his  noble  back­
in all Creece. 50 during
ground, he married into an  established Lisbon family that had exceIIent         the Olympic games, in
connectons with Portuguese royalty.                                              which he had himself
                                                                                 won the chariot race, he
Through his in-Iaws,  Columbus finagled a meeting with  the king of
                                                                                 had a puhlic announce­
Portugl, Joäo 11, whom he pettioned to finance a westward voyage aimed           ment made, to the effect
at discovering a shorter route to Asia. In retur for announcing that any         that any Creek who
thought himself good
dscoveries  he achieved would be  made in the  king's  na                        e,  Columbus
enough to oecome
Ianted a series of rights : the title Grad Admiral of the Oceanic Sea; the
Cleisthenes ' son-in-law
office of viceroy over any lands he found; ad  10 percent of the fture
should present himself
commerce with such lands. All of these rights were to be hereditary and for      in 5icyon within sixty
days-or sooner if he
a time. Columbus made these demands even though he had previously
wished-because he
been a mere merchant, he knew almost nothing about navigation, he could
intended, within fhe
not work a quadrant, and he had never led a group of men. In short he had        year following the
absolutely no qualifications for the jourey he proposed. Furthermore, his        sixtiefh day, fo hetmth
his daughter to her
pettion incIuded no details as to how he would accomplish his plans, just
future hushand,
vague promises.
Cleisfhenes had had a
When Columbus finished his pitch, Joäo 11 smiled: He politely de­                race-frack and a
cIined the offer, but lef the door open for the fture. Here Columbus mu t        wrestling-ring specially
made for his purpose,
have noticed something he would never forget: Even as the king tured
ami presently the suit­
down  the  sailor's  demads,  he  teated them as  legitmate .  He  neither
ors began to arrive­
laughed at Columbus nor questioned his background and credentals. In             every man of Creek
fact the king was impressed by the boldness of Columbus's requests, and          nationality who had
something to be proud
cIearly feit comfortable in the company of a ma who acted so confidently.
ofeither in his country
The meeting must have convinced Columbus that his instincts were cor­
or in himsel! '
rect: By asking for the moon, he had instantly raised his own status, for the    Cleisthenes hegan hy
king assumed that unless a man who set such a high price on hirself were         asking each fof fhe
numerous suiturs} in
mad, which Columbus did not appear to be, he must somehow be worth it.
tur fo name his coun­
A few years later Columbus moved to Spain. Using his Portuguese
try and parentage; then
connectons, he moved in elevated circles at the Spanish court, receiving         he kept them in his
subsidies  fom  ilIustrious  finaciers  ad  sharing tables  with  dukes  and     hOllse for a year, fo get
to know fhem weil,
princes. To   all these men he repeated his request for financing for a voyage
entering into conversa­
to   the west-ad aso for te rights he had demanded fom Joäo 11. Some,
tion with them some­
such as the powerfl duke of Medina, wanted to help, but could not, since         times singly, sometimes
they lacked the power to grant hir the ttles and rights he wanted. But           all together, and f('sfing
                                                                                 each of fhem for his
Columbus would not back down. He soon realized that only one person
                                                                                 LAW 3 4                      285

manly qllalities and                                                               could meet his demands: Queen Isabella. I n  1487 h e  finally managed a
lemper, educalion and
                                                                                                                                                                   meeting wit the queen, and athough he could not convince her to finace
manners                                                                            But the
                                                                                                                                                                   the voyage, he completely charmed her, and became a frequent guest in
mosl impor!anl lesl af
a// was Iheir behaviour                                                                                                                                            the palace.
al the dinner-Iable. A //                                                                                                                                          In  1492 the Spaish finally expelled the Moorish invaders who cen­
Ihis went on through-
turies earlier had seized parts of the country. With the wa                        me burden on
out Iheir slay in Sicyon,
her treasury lifted, Isabella feit she could finally respond to the demands of
and a// Ihe lime he
enterlained Ihem hand­                                                             her explorer fiend, and she decided to pay for three ships, equipment, the
somely.                                                                            salaries of the crews, and a modest stipend for Columbus. More important,
For one reason or
she had a contact drawn up that granted Columbus the titles ad rights on
anolher il was Ihe Iwo
which he had insisted. The only one she denied-and only in the contract's
Athenians who
impressed Cleislhenes                                                              fine print-was the  10 percent of all revenues from any lands discovered:
most!avourably, and                                                                an absurd demand, since he wanted no time limit on it.  (Had the clause
o! Ihe Iwo Tisander's
                                                                                   been left in, it would  eventually have made Columbus and his  heirs the
son Hippocleides came
to be preferred. .                                                                 wealthiest family on the planet. Columbus never read the fine print.)
AI lasl the day came                                                               Satisfied that his demands had been met, Columbus set sail that same
whieh hall been fixed                                                              year in search of the passage to Asia. (Before he left he was carefl to hire
for Ihe belrolhal, ami
                                                                                   the best navigator he could find to help hir get there.) The mission failed
Cleislhenes har 10
dee/are his ehoice. lIe                                                            to find such a passage, yet when Columbus pettoned the queen to finance
marked Ihe day by Ihe                                                              an  even  more  ambitious voyage the following year,  she agreed. By then
sacrifiee of a hundred
she had come to see Columbus as destined for great things,
oxen, and Ihen !ave a
greal banquel, 10 which
nol only Ihe suilors bul                                                           Interpretation
everyone of nole in                                                                As an explorer Columbus was mediocre at best. He knew less about the
Sieyon was in viled.
sea than did the average sailor on his ships, could never determine the lati­
When dinner was over,
tude and longitude of his discoveries, mistook islands for vast continents,
Ihe suÜors began 10
compete with each                                                                  and treated his crew badly. But in one area he was a genius: He knew how
olher in musie and in                                                              to seIl hirself. How else to explain how te son of a cheese vendor, a low­
lalkinR in company.
level sea merchant, managed to ingratiate hirself with the highest royal
In bolh Ihese accom ­
and aristocratic fa                                                                lies?
plishments il was
Hippoe/eides who                                                                                                                                                   Columbus had an amazing power to charm the  nobility,  and it all
proved by far the                                                                  ca                                                                              e from the way he carried hirself. He projected a sense of confidence
douRhliesl champion,
that was completely out of proportion to his means. Nor was his confidence
unlil al lasl, as more
the aggressive, ugly self-promoton of an upstart-it was a quiet and calm
and more wine waS
drunk, he asked Ihe                                                                self-assurance, In fact it was the same confidence usually shown by the no­
flule-player 10 play him                                                           bility themselves. The powerfl in the old-style aristocracies feit no need to
a lune ami be!an to
prove or assert themselves; being noble, they knew they always deserved
danee 10 il. Now it may
more, and asked for it. With Columbus, then, they felt an instant affinity,
we// be Ihal he danced
la his own salis!aclion;                                                           for he  carried hirself just the way they did-elevated above the  crowd,
Cleislhenes, however,                                                              destned for greatness.
who was walchinR
Understand: It is within your power to set your own price. How you
Ihe performance,
carry yourself reflects what you think of yourself. If you ask for little, shuf­
began 10 have seri(JUS
                                                                                   daubls aboul lhe whole                                                          fle your feet and lower your head, people will assure this reflects your
                                                                                   business. Presenlly,                                                            character. But this behavior is not you-it is only how you have chosen to
                                                                                   afler a briefpause,
                                                                                                                                                                   present yourself to    other people. You can just as    easily present the Colum­
                                                                                   Hippoe/eides senf !or a
                                                                                   table; the table waS                                                            bus front:  buoyancy,  confidence, ad the feeling that you were bor to
                                                                                   broURhl, and                                                                    wear a crown.
286                                                                                LAW 3 4

With alt great deceivers there is a noteworthy occurrence to which the owe their       Hippoc!eides, c/imbing
on to it, danced first
power. In the actual act 0/ decetion the are overcome by belief in themselves: it is
Laconian dances,                                                                       .\'Onle
this which then speaks so mirculously and compeltingly to those arund them.
next some Attic ones,
Friedrich Nietzsehe, 1 844-1 900                                                       and ended by standing
on his head and beat­
ing time with his legs in
the air. The Laconian
KEYS TO POWER
and Altic dances were
As children, we start OUf lives with great exuberace, expecting and de­                bad enough; but
manding everything from the world. This generally carries over into OUf                Cleisthenes, tholgh
                                                                                       he already loathed the
first forays into society, as we begin OUf careers. But as we grow older the
                                                                                       thought o[having a
rebuffs     ad flUfes we experience set up boundaries tat only get firmer              son-in-law like that,
with time. Coming to expect less from the world, we accept limitations that            nevertheless restrained
ae really self-imposed. We start to bow and scrape and apologize for even              himself and managed
                                                                                       to avoid an outburst;
te simplest of requests. The solution to such a shrinking of horizons is to
                                                                                       but when he saw
deliberately force ourselves in the  opposite directon-to  downplay the                Hippocleides beating
flures and ignore the limitatons, to mae oUfselves demad and expect                    time with his legs, he
could bear it no Ionger.
a                                                                                      much as the child. To    accomplish this, we must use a particular strategy
"Son of Tisander, " he
upon oUfselves. Call it the Strategy of the Crown.
cried, "you have
The Strategy of the Crown is based on a simple chain of cause and ef­                  danced away your
fect: If we believe we are destined for great things, OUf belief will radiate          marriage. "
outward, just as a crown creates an aura around a king. This outward radi­             TIIE HISTORIFS.
HFRODOTliS.
ace will infect the people around us, who will think we must have reasons              FWfl! CENTURY Re.
to feel so confident. People who wear crowns seem to feel no inner sense of
te limits to what they can ask for or what they can accomplish. This too
radiates outward. Limits and boundaries disappear. Use the Strategy of the
Crown and you will be surprised how ofen it bears fruit. Take as an exam­
pIe those happy children who ask for whatever they want, and get it. Their
high expectations ae their charm.                                                      Aults enjoy granting their wishe                                              s   just
a                                                                                      Isabella enjoyed granting the wishes of Columbus.
Throughout history, people of undistnguished birth-the Theodoras of
Byzantum, the Columbuses, the Beethovens, the Disraelis-have managed
to work the Stategy of the Crown, believing so firmly in their own greatness
tat it becomes a self-flfilling prophecy. The trick is simple: Be overcome
by yoUf self-belief. Even while you know you are practicing a kind of de­
ception on YOUfself, act like a king. You ae likely to be treated as one.
The crown may separate you fom other people, but it is up to you to
make that separation rea: You have to act differently, demollStrating your
distance fom those around you. One way to emphasize YOUf difference is
to always act with dignity, no matter the circumstance. Louis-Philippe gave
no sense of being different fom other people-he was the banker king.
And  the  moment  his  subjects  threatened  him,  he  caved  in.  Everyone
sensed this and pounced. Lacking rega dignity ad firmness of purpose,
Louis-Philippe  seemed  a  impostor, and the  crown was easily toppled
fom his head.
Regal bearing should not be confsed with arrogance. Arrogance may
seem the king's entitlement, but in fact it betrays insecurity. It is the very
opposite of a royal demeanor.
LAW 34                                                                                 287

Haile Selassie, mler ofEthiopia for forty or S O  years beginning in 1930,
was once a young man named Lij Tafai. He came from a noble family, but
there                                                                            w        no real chance of hir coming to power, for he was far down te
line of succession from the king then on the throne, Menelik 11. Neverthe­
less, from an early age he exhibited a self-confidence and a royal bearing
tat surprised everyone around hir.
At the age of fourteen, Tafari went to live at the court, where he imme­
diately impressed Menelik and became his favorite. Tafari's grace under
fire, his patience, and his calm self-assurance fascinated the king. The other
young nobles, arrogant, blustery, and envious, would push this sligt,
bookish teenager around. But he never got angry-that would have been a
sign of insecurity, to which he would not stoop. There were already people
around hir who feIt he would someday rise to the top, for he acted as ifhe
were already there.
Years later, in 1936, when the ltaian Fascists had taken over Ethiopia
and Tafari, now called Haile Selassie, was in exile, he addressed the League
of Natons to plead his country's case. The Italians in the audience hecled
hir with vulgar abuse, but he maintained his dignified pose, as if cor­
.pletely unaffected. This elevated hir while making his opponents look
even ugier. Dignity, in fact, is invariably the mask to assure under difficult
circumstances: It is as if nothing can affect you, and you have all the time
in the world to respond. This is an extemely powerfl pose.
A royal demeanor has other uses. Con artists have long known the
value of an aistocratc font; it either dis ams people and makes them less
suspicious, or else it intimidates them and puts them on the defensiv   ad
as Count Victor Lustg knew, once you put a sucker on the defensive he is
doomed. The con man Yellow Kid Weil, too, would often asure the tap­
pings of a man of wealth, along with the nonchalance that goes with ther.
Alluding to some magical method of making money, he would stand aloof,
like a king, exuding confidence as if he really were fabulously rich. The
suckers would beg to be in on the con, to have a chace at the wealth that
he so clearly displayed.
Finally, to reinforce the inner psychological tricks involved in project­
ing a roya demeanor, there are outwad stategies to help you create the
effect. First, the Columbus Strategy: Always mae a bold demad. Set your
price high and do not waver. Second, in a dignified way, go afer the high­
est person in the building. This immediately puts you on te same plane           a
the chief executive you ae attacking. It is the David and Goliath Stateg:
By choosing a great opponent, you create the appearance of greatness.
Third, give a gif of some sort to those above you. This is the strateg
of those who have a paton: By giving your paon a gif, you are essentialy
saying that the two of you are equal. It is te old con game of giving so that
you ca take. When the Renaissance writer Pietro Aretno wanted te
Duke of Mantua as his next paton, he knew that if he was slavish ad
sycophatic, the duke would think hir unworty; so he approaced the
duke with gifs, in this case paintngs by the writer's good friend Tita.
288                                                                              LAW 34

Accepting the gifs created a kind of equality between duke and writer: The
duke was put at ease by the feeling that he was dealing with a man of his
own aristocratie stamp. He fnded Aretno generously. The gift stategy is
subtle ad brilliat beeause you do not beg: You ask for help in a dignified
way that implies equality between two people, one of whom just happens
to have more money.
Remember: It is up to you to set your own priee. Ask for less and that
is just what you will get. Ask for more, however, and you send a signal that
you ae worth a king's rasom. Even those who tur you down respeet you
for your eonfidenee, and that respeet will eventually pay off in ways you
cannot imagine.
Image : The Crown. Plaee it upon your head
and you assume a different pose-tranquil
yet radiating assuranee.  Never show
doubt,  never lose  your  dignity  beneath
the erown, or it will not fit. It will seem
to be destined for one more worthy. Do
not wait for a eoronation; the great­
est emperors  crown  themselves.
Authority : Everyone should be royal afer his own fashion. Let all your
actions,  even  though  they are  not  those  of a king,  be,  in their own
sphere,   worthy  of  one.   Be   sublime  in  your  deeds,   lofty  in   your
thoughts; and in  all your doings show that you deserve to be a king
even though you are not one in reality.  (Baltasar Graeiän,  1601- 1658)
LAW 34                                                                           289

REVERSAL
The idea behind the assumption of regal confidence is to set yourself apart
from  other people, but if you take  this too far it will  be  your undoing.
Never make the mistake of thinking that you elevate yourself by humiliat­
ing people.  Also,  it is  never  a good  idea to  100m  too  high  above  the
crowd-you make an easy target. And there are tmes when an aistocratic
pose is eminently dangerous.
Charles I, king of England during the 1640s, faced a profound public
disenchantment with the institution of monarchy. Revolts erupted through­
out the country, led by Oliver Cromwell. Had Charles reacted to the tmes
with insight, supporting reforms and maing a show of sacrificing some of
his power, history might have been different.  Instead he  reverted to a
even more regal pose, seeming outraged by the assault on his power and
on the divine instituton of monarchy. His stff kingliness offended people
and spurred on their revolts. And eventually Charles lost his head, literally.
Understand: You are radiatng confidence, not arrogance or disdain.
Finally, it is true that you ca sometimes find some power through af­
fecting a kind of  earthy vulgaity, which will prove amusing by  its extreme­
ness. But to the extent that you win this game by going beyond the limits,
separating yourself from other people by appearing even more vulgar than
they are, the game is dangerous: There will always be people more vulga
than you, and you will easily be replaced the following season by someone
younger and worse.
290                                                                              LAW 34

LAW
35
MASTER THE ART
OF TIMING
JUDGMENT
Never seem to be in a hurry-hurying betrays a lack of
control over yoursel  and over time. Always seem pa­
tient, as if you know that everything will come to you
eventually. Become a detective of the rght moment; snifJ
out the spirt of the times, the trends that will carry you to
power. Lear to stand back when the time is not yet ripe,
and to strike fiercely when it has reachedjuition.
291

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Starting out in life a a nondescript French seminary-school teacher, Joseph
Fouche wandered from town to town for most of the decade of the 1780s,
Sertarius's strength was
teaching mathematics to young boys. Yet he never completely committed
naw rapidty increasing.
himself to the church, never took his vows as a priest-he had bigger plans.
for all the trihes
hetween the Ebro and                                                                Patiently waiting for his chance, he kept his optons open. And when the
the Pyrenees came over
French Revoluton broke out, in 1789, Fouche waited no longer: He got rid
to his side. and troaps
of his casock, grew his har long, and became a revolutionary. For this was
came jlocking daity to
the spirit of te times. To   miss the boat at this critical moment could have
ja in him from every
quarter. At the same                                                                spelt disaster. Fouche did not miss te boat: Befriending the revolutionary
time he was troubled                                                                leader Robespierre, he quickly rose in the rebel ranks. In 1792 the town of
by the lack of discipline
                                                                                    Nantes elected Fouche to be its representative to  the  National Convention
and the overcanfidence
of these newly arrived                                                              (created that year to frame a new consttution for a French republic) .
harbarians. who would                                                               When Fouche arrived in Paris to tae his seat at the convention, a vio­
shout at him to attack
lent rift had broken out between the moderates and the radica Jacobins.
the enemy and had no
Fouche sensed tat in te long run neither side would emerge victorious.
patience with his delay-
ing tactics. and he                                                                 Power rarely ends up in the hands of those who start a revolution, or even
therefore tried to win                                                              of those who further it; power sticks to those who bring it to a conclusion.
them over hy argument.
That was the side Fouche wanted to be on.
BU( when he saw that
His sense of timing was uncanny. He started as a moderate, for moder­
they were discontcnted
and pen'isted in press­                                                             ates were in the majority. When te time came to decide on whether or not
ing their demands                                                                   to execute Louis XVI, however, he saw tat the people were clamoring for
regardless of the
the king's head, so he  cat the deciding vote-for the guillotne. Now he
circumstances. he let
had become a radical. Yet as tensions came to    the boll in    Paris, he foresaw
thcm have their way
and allowed ehem to                                                                 te danger of being too closely associated with any one faction, so he ac­
engage the enemy; he                                                                cepted a position in the provinces, where he could lie low for a while. A
haped that they wauld
few months later he was assigned to the post of proconsul in Lyons, where
suffer a severe defcat
he oversaw the execution of dozens of aristocrats. A a certain moment,
without heing
completely crushed.                                                                                                                                                however, he called a halt to the killings, sensing tat te mood of the coun­
and that this wauld                                                                 try was                                                                        ting-and despite the blood already on his hands, the citizens of
make them better
Lyons hailed him as    a savior fom what had become known as    the Terror.
dispased to ohey hü
So far Fouche  had  played his  cards  brilliantly,  but in                         1794  his old
orders in flaure.
Thc event turned out as                                                             friend Robespierre recalled him to Paris to account for his actons in Lyons.
he expected and Serto­                                                              Robespierre had been the  driving force behind the Terror.  He had sent
rius came to their
heads  on both  te  right and the  lef  rolling,  and Fouche,  whom he no
rescue. provided a
longer trusted, seemed destined to provide the next head. Over the next
rallying point far the
fugitives. and led them                                                             few  weeks,  a  tense  struggle  ensued:  While  Robespierre  railed  openly
safely back to his                                                                  against Fouche, accusing of him dangerous ambitions and calling for his ar­
camp. His next step was
rest,  the  crafy  Fouche  worked more indirectly,  quietly  gaining  support
to revive their dejected
among those who were beginning to tire of Robespierre's dictatorial con­
spirits. and so a few
days tater he                                                                       trol. Fouche was playing for time. He knew that the longer he survived, the
summoned a general                                                                  more  disaffected citizens he  could rally  against Robespierre.  He  had to
assemhly. Beiare it he
                                                                                    have broad support before he moved against the power                           leader. He    ral­
produced two horses.
one ofthem old and                                                                  lied support among both the moderates and the Jacobins, playing on te
cnfeehled. the other                                                                widespread fear of Robespierre--everyone wa  afraid of being the next t
large and lusty and                                                                 go  to  the guillotine. It all came to fruition on July 27:  The convention
292                                                                                 LAW  3 5

tmed against Robespierre, shoutng down his usual lengthy speech. He                   possessing a jowing
tail, which was remark­
wa quickly arrested, ad a few days later it was Robespierre's head, not
able for the thickness
Fouche's, that fell into the basket.
and beauty of ifs hair.
When Fouche retured to the convention after Robespierre's death, he                   By the side ofthe weak
played  his  most  unexpected  move:  Having led  the  conspiracy  against            horse stood a tall
strong man, and by the
Robespierre, he was expected to sit with the moderates, but 10 and behold,
side of the powerful
he once again changed sides, joining the radical Jacobins. For perhaps the
hO"'e a short man oI
fst time in his life he aligned hirself with the minority. Clearly he sensed          mean physique. At a
a reaction  stirring:  He  knew that the  moderate  facton that had  executed         signal the strong man
seized the tai! of his
Robespierre, and was now about to take power, would initiate a new round
horse and tried with all
of te Terror, this time against the radicals. In siding with the Jacobins,
his strength to pull it
                                                                                      ten, Fouche was sitting with the martyrs of the days to come-the people       towards hir, as ifto
                                                                                      who would be considered blameless in the toubles that were on their way.      tear if off   while the
                                                                                                                                                                    weak man began to
                                                                                      Taing sides with what was about to become the losing team was a risky
                                                                                                                                                                    pull the hairs one by
ga                                                                                    bit, of course, but Fouche must have calculated he could keep his head        one from the tail of the
                                                                                      long enough to  quietly  stir up  the populace  against the  moderates  and   strang horse.
The strong man, after
watch them fall fom power. And indeed, although the moderates did call
tugging with all his
for his arest in December of 1795, and would have sent hir to the guillo­
might to no purpose
tne, too much time had passed. The executons had become unpopular                     and causing the specta­
wt the people, and Fouche survived the swing of the pendulum one more                 tors a great deal of
amusement in the
tme.
pracess, finally gave up
A new government took over, the Directoire. It was not, however, a
the attempt, while the
Jacobin goverment, but a moderate one-more moderate than the gov­                     weak man quickly and
emment that had reimposed the Terror. Fouche, the radical, had kept his               wifh very little trouble
stripped his horse 's tai!
head, but now he had to keep a low profile. He wated patiently on the
completely bare. Then
sidelines  for  several  years,   allowing  time  to  soften  any  bitter  feelings
Sertorius rose to his
aganst hir, then he approached the Directoire  and c onvinced tem he                  feet and said, "Now
had a new passion: intelligence-gathering. He became a paid spy for the               you can see, my friends
and allies, that perse­
govemment, excelled at the job, and in 1799 was rewarded by being made
verance is more effec­
mnister of police. Now he was not just empowered but required to extend
tive than brute strength,
his spying to every corer of France-a responsibility that would greatly               and that there are many
reinforce his natural ability to sniff out where the wind was blowing. One            difficulties that cannot
be overcome ifyou try
of the  first  social trends  he  detected,  in  fact,  came  in  the  person  of
to do everything at
Napoleon, a brash young general whose destiny he right away saw was en­
on ce, but which will
tned with the fture of France. When Napoleon unleashed a coup d'etat,                 yield ifyou master
on   November 9, 1799, Fouche pretended to be asleep. Indeed he slept the             them liftle by little. The
truth is that a steady
whole day. For this indirect assistace-it might have been thought his job,
continuous effort is
aer all, to prevent a military coup-Napoleon kept hir on as minister of
irresistible, for this is
police in the new regime.                                                             the way in which Time
Over the next few years, Napoleon came to rely on Fouche more and                     captures and subdues
the greatest powers on
more. He even gave this former revolutonary a title, duke of Otranto, and
earth. Now Time, you
rewaded hir with great wealth.  By  1808, however, Fouche,  aways at­
should remember, is a
tned to the times, sensed that Napoleon was on the downswing. His ftile               good friend and ally to
those who use their
wa with Spain, a county that posed no threat to France, was a sign that he
intelligence to choose
was losing a sense of proportion. Never one to be caught on a sinking ship,
the right moment, but a
Fouche conspired with Talleyrand to bring about Napoleon's downfall. A-               most dangerous enemy
LAW 35                                                                                29:

to those who rush into                                                         though the conspiracy failed-Talleyrand was fired; Fouche stayed, but
action at the wrang
was kept on a tght leash-it publicized a growing discontent wit the em­
one
peror, who seemed to be losing control. Ey 1814 Napoleon's power had
LlFE OF SERTORIlJS,
PLlJTARCH,                                                                     crumbled and allied forces finally conquered hir.
c. A.D. 46-120
The next goverment was a restoraton of the monarchy, in the form
of King Louis XVIII, brother of Louis XVI. Fouche, his nose always sniff­
ing the air for the next social shift, knew Louis would not last long-he had
none of Napoleon's flair. Fouche once agan played his waiting game, lying
low, staying away from the spotlight. Sure enough, in February of 1815,
Napoleon escaped from the island of Elba, where he had been imprisoned.
Louis XVIII panicked: His policies had alienated the citizenry, who were
claoring for Napoleon's retur. So Louis tured to the one man who
Mr. Shih had two sons:
one loved learning; the                                                        could maybe have saved his hide, Fouche, the former radical who had sent
other war. The first                                                           his brother, Louis XVI, to te guillotine, but was now one of the most pop­
expounded his moral
ular ad widely admired politcians in France. Fouche, however, would not
teachings at the
side with a loser: He refsed Louis's request for help by pretending that bis
admiring court of Ch 'i
and was made a tutor,                                                          help was unnecessary-by swearing that Napoleon would never ret
while the second talked                                                        to power (although he knew otherwise). A short time later, of course,
strategy at the bellicose
Napoleon and his new citzen amy were closing in on Paris.
court of Ch 'u and was
made a general. The                                                            Seeing his reign about to collapse, feeling that Fouche had betrayed
impecunious Mr. Meng,                                                          hir, and certain that he did not want this powerful and able man on
hearing of these                                                               Napoleon's tea, King Louis ordered the minister's arrest ad execution.
successes, sent his own
                                                                               On March  16,  1815, policemen surrounded Fouche's coach on a Pais
two sons out to follow
the example ofthe                                                              boulevard. Was this finally his end? Perhaps, but not immediately: Fouche
Shih boys. The first                                                           told the police that an ex-member of goverment could not be arrested on
expounded his moral
the street. They fell for the story and allowed hir to retur hore. Later
teachings at the court
that day, though, they came to his house and once again declared hir
of Ch'in, but the King
of Ch 'in said: "At                                                            under arrest. Fouche nodded-but would the officers be so kind as allow a
present the states are                                                         gentleman to wash and to change his clothes before leaving his house for
quarreling violently
the last time? They gave their permission, Fouche left the room, and the
and every prince is
minutes went by. Fouche did not retur. Finally the policemen went into
busy arming his troops
to the teeth. If I                                                             the next room-where they saw a ladder against an open window, leading
followed this prig's                                                           down to the garden below.
pratings we should
That day ad the next the police combed Paris for Fouche, but by then
soon be annihilated. "
Napoleon's cannons were audible in the distance and the king and all the
So he had the fellow
castrated. Meanwhi/e,                                                          king's men had to flee the city. As soon as Napoleon entered Paris, Fouche
the second brother                                                             came out of hiding. He had cheated the executoner once again. Napoleon
displayed his military
greeted his former minister of police and gladly restored hir to his old
genius at the court of
post. During the 100 days that Napoleon remained in power, until Water-
Wei. But the King of
Wei said: " Mine is a                                                          100, it was essentally Fouche who govered France. After Napoleon fell,
weak state. If I relied                                                        Louis XVIII retured to the throne, and like a cat with nine lives, Fauche
on force instead of
stayed on to serve in yet another goverment-by then his power and in­
dip/omacy, we should
fluence had grown so great that not even the king dared challenge hir.
soon be wiped out. If
on the other hand, I let
this fire-eater go, he                                                         Interpretation
will offer his services to
In a period of unprecedented turmoil, Joseph Fouche thrived through his
another state and then
mastery of the art of timing. He teaches us a number of key lessons.
294                                                                            LAW 35

First, it is critical to recognize the spirit of the times. Fouche always         we shall be in trouble. "
So he had the fellow s
looked two steps aead, found the wave that would cary hir to power,
feet cut off Both fami­
and rode it. You must always work with the times, aticipate tists ad
lies did exaetly the
trs, and never miss the boat. Sometimes the spirit ofthe times is obscure:        same thing, but one
Recognize it not by what is loudest ad most obvious in it, but by what lies       timed it right, the other
wrong. Thus suecess
hdden and dormant. Look forward to the Napoleons of the fture rather
depends on . . . rhythm.
ta holding on to the ruins of the past.
LIEH TZll, QlJOTED  IN
Second, recognizing the prevailing winds does not necessarily mea                 THE CHINESE LOOKING
GLASS,
rnning with them. Any potent social movement creates a powerfl reac­
DENNIS BLOODWORTH,
ton, and it is wise to anticipate what that reaction will be, as Fouche did       1967
aer the executon of Robespierre. Rather than ride the cresting wave of
te moment, wait for the tide's ebb to carry you bac to power. Upon occa­
sion bet on the reaction that is brewing, ad place yourself in the vanguard
of it.
Finally, Fouche had remarkable patience. Without patience as your
sword and shield, your timing will fail and you will inevitably find yourself
The sultan [of PersiaJ
a loser. When the times were against Fouche, he did not struggle, get emo­        had senteneed two men
tona, or strike out rashly. He kept his cool and maintained a low profile,        to death. One of them,
patently building support among the citizenry, the bulwark in his next rise       knowing how mueh the
                                                                                  sultan loved his stal­
to power. Whenever he found hirself in the weaker position, he played for
                                                                                  !ion, offered to teaeh
tme, which he knew would always be his ally i he was patient. Recognize           the horse to jy within a
te moment, then, to hide in the grass or slither under a rock, as weIl as the     year in return for his
!ife. The sultan, faney­
moment to bare your fangs and attack.
ing himself as the rider
ofthe only jying horse
Space we can recover time never                                                   in the world, agreed.
Napoleon Bonaparte, 1 76 9- 1 82 1                                                The other prisoner
                                                                                  looked at his friend in
                                                                                  disbelie! " You know
                                                                                  horses don 't jy. What
KEYS TO POWER                                                                     made you come up
Time is an artificial concept that we ourselves have created to make the          with a erazY idea like
that? You're only post­
litlessness of eterity and the universe more bearable, more huma.
poning the inevitable. "
Since we have constructed the concept of time, we are also able to mold it
"Not so, " said the [first
to some degree, to play ticks with it. The time of a child is long and slow,      prisoner]. "I have aetu­
wt vast expanses; the time of an adult whizzes by frighteningly fast.             ally given myselffour
chances for freedom.
Tme, then, depends on perception, which, we know, can be willflly al­
First, the sultan might
tered. This is the first thing to understand in mastering the art of timing. If
die during the year.
te inner turmoil caused by our emotons tends to mae time move faster,             5eeond, 1 might die.
it follows that once we contol our emotional responses to events, time will       Third, the horse might
die. And fourth . . . 1
move much more slowly. This altered way of dealing with things tends to
might teaeh the horse
lengthen our perception of future time, opens up possibilites that fea ad         tu jy!"
ager dose off, and allows us the patience that is the principal requirement       THE CRAFT OF POWER.
i te                                                                              a                           of timing.   R.G. H. Sm,
1 979
There are three kinds of time for us to deal with; eac presents prob­
lems that can be solved with skill and practice. First there is lon time: the
d-out, years-Iong kind of tme that must be managed with patience
and gentle guidance. Our handling of long time should be mostly defen­
sive-this is the art of not reacting impulsively, of waiting for opportunity.
LAW 3 5                                                                           295

Next there i s Jrced time: the short-term time that we can manipulate as an
offensive weapon, upsetting the timing of oUf  opponents. Finally there is
T I I E  T I{O[  T \,\D
end time, when a plan must be  executed with speed ad force. We have
I' I I E C [  I l C i':Ol
waited, found the moment, and must not hesitate.
A fisherman in the
month ofMay stood
angling on the bank of                                                          Long Tme. The famous seventeenth-century Ming painter Chou Yung
the Thames with an                                                              relates a story that altered his behavior forever. Late one winter aftemoon
artificial fly. He threw
                                                                                he set out to visit a town that lay across the river from his own town. He
his bait with so milch
art, that a young trollt                                                        was bringing some important books and papers with hir and had commis­
was rlshing toward it,                                                          sioned a young boy to help hir carry them. As te ferry neared the other
when she was                                                                    side of the river, Chou Yung asked the boatman if they would have time to
prevented by her
get to the town before its gates closed, since it was a mHe  away  ad night
mother. "Never, " said
was approaching. The boat                                                       an glanced at the boy, and at the bundle of
she, "my child, be too
precipitate, where there                                                        loosely tied papers and books-"Yes," he    replied, "if you do not walk too
is a possibility of
fast."
danger. Take dlle time
As  they  started  out,  however,  the  sun was setting.  Afraid  of being
to consider, before YOI
locked out of the town at night, prey to local badits, Chou and the boy
risk an action that may
be fatal. How know                                                              walked faster and faster, finally breaking into  a run. Suddenly the  sting
YOI whether yon                                                                 around the papers broke and the documents scattered on the ground. It
appearance be indeed a
                                                                                took them many minutes to  put the pacet togeter again, and by the tme
fly, or the snare of an
enemy? Let someone                                                              they had reached the city gates, it was too late.
else make the experi­                                                           When you force the pace out of fear and impatence, you create a nest
ment before you. lf it                                                          of problems that require fixing, and you end up taking much longer than i
be a jy, he will very
                                                                                you had taken YOUf tme. Hurriers may occasionally get there quicker, but
probably elllde the first
attack: and the second                                                          papers fly everywhere, new dangers arise, and they find themselves in con­
may be made, if not                                                             stant crisis mode, fixing the problems that they themselves have created.
with SlIccess, at least
Sometimes not actng in the face of danger is YOUf best move-you wait,
with safety. "
you deliberately slow down. As time passes it will eventually present op­
She had no sooner spo­
ken, than a gldgeon                                                             portunites you had not imagined.
seized the pretended                                                            Waitng involves contolling not only YOUf own emotons but those of
fly, and became an
YOUf colleagues, who, rstaking action for power, may try to push you into
example to the giddy
making rash moves. In YOUf rivals, on the other hand, you can encourage
dallghter of the impor­
tance ofher mother's                                                            this same mistake : If you let them rush headlong into trouble while you
colinseI.                                                                       stand back and wait, you will soon find ripe moments to intervene and pic
FABLES.                                                                         up the pieces. This wise policy was the principal stategy of the great early­
ROBERT DODSLEY,
1703-1764                                                                       seventeenth-century emperor Tokugawa Ieyasu ofJapan. When his prede­
cessor, the headstong Hideyoshi, whom he served as a general, staged a
rash invasion of Korea, Ieyasu did not involve hirself He knew the inva­
sion would be a dis aster and would lead to Hideyoshi's downfall. Better to
stand patiently on the sidelines, even Jr many years, and then be in position
to seize power when the time is right-exactly what Ieyasu did, with great
artistry.
You do not deliberately slow time down t live longer, or to take more
pleasUfe in te moment, but the better to play the game of power.  First,
when YOUf mind is uncluttered by constant emergencies you will see fur­
ther into the fture. Second, you will be able to resist the baits that people
296                                                                             LAW 35

dagle in front of you, and will keep yourself from becoming another im­
patent sucker. Third, you will have more room to be flexible. Opportuni­
ties will inevitably aise that you had not expected ad would have missed
had you forced the pace. Fourth, you will not move from one deal to the
next without completng the first one. To    build your power's foundation
can take years; make sure that foundaon is secure. Do not be a flash in the
pan-success that is built up slowly and surely is the only kind that lasts.
Finally, slowing time down will give you a perspectve on the tmes
you live in, lettng you take a certan distance and puttng you in a less
emotionally charged position to see the shapes of things to come. Hurriers
will often mistake surface phenomena for a real trend, seeing only what
tey want to see. How much better to see what is really happening, even if
it is unpleasant or makes your task harder.
Forced Tme. The trick in forcing time is to upset the timing of others-to
make them hurry, to make them wait, to make them abandon their own
pace, to distort their perception of time. Ey upsetting the timing of your op­
ponent while you stay patient, you open up time for yourself, whic is half
te game.
In 1473 the great Turkish sultan Mehmed the Conqueror invited nego­
tations with Hungay to end the off-and-on war the two countries had
waged for years. When the Hungarian emissay arrived in Turkey to start
te talks, Turkish officials humbly apologized-Mehmed had just lef Istan­
bul, the capital, to battle his longtime foe, Uzun Hasa. Eut he urgently
wanted peace with Hungary, and had asked that the emissary join hir at
te front.
When the emissary arrived at the site of the fighting, Mehmed had al­
ready left it, moving eastward in pursuit of his swif foe. This happened
several times. Wherever the emissary stopped, the Turks lavished gifs and
banquets on hir, in pleasurable but time-consuming ceremonies. Finally
Mehmed defeated Uzun ad met with the emissary. Yet his terms for peace
with Hungary were excessively harsh. Mter a few days, the negotiatons
ended, and the usual stalemate remained in place. Eut this was fine with
Mehmed. In fact he had planned it that way all along: Plotting his cam­
paign against Uzun, he had seen that diverting his armies to the east would
leave his wester flank vulnerable. To  prevent Hungary fom taking advan­
tge of his weakness and his preoccupaton elsewhere, he first dangled the
lure of peace before his enemy, then made them wat-al on his own
terms.
Making people wait is a powerfl way of forcing time, as long as they
do not figure out what you are up to. You control the dock, they linger in
limbo-and rapidly come unglued, opening up opportunities for you to
stike. The opposite effect is equally powerfl: You make your opponents
hurry. Start off your dealings with them slowly, then suddenly apply pres­
sure, making them feel that everything is happening at once. People who
lack the time to think will make mistakes-so set their deadlines for them.
LAW 3 5                                                                          297

This was the technique Machiavelli admired in Cesare Borgia, who, during
negotiations, would suddenly press vehemendy for a decision, upsettng
his  opponent's timing  and  patence.  For who  would dare make  Cesare
wait?
Joseph Duveen, the famous                                                        a                                                             dealer, knew that if he gave an indeci­
sive buyer like John D. Rockefeller a deadline-the paintng had to leave
the county, anoter tycoon was interested in it-te dient would buy just
in tme. Freud notced that patients who had spent years in psychoanalysis
without improvement would miraculously recover just in tme if he fixed a
definite date for the end of the therapy. Jacques Lacan, the faraus French
psychoanalyst, used a variation on this  tactic-he  would  sometmes end
the  customary  hour  session  of therapy  afer  only  ten  minutes, without
waming. After this happened several times, the patent would realize tat
he had better make maximum use of the time, rather than wasting much of
the  hour with a lot of talk that meant nothing. The deadline, then, is a pow­
erfl tool. Close off the vistas of indecision and force people to make up
their damn minds or get to the point-never let them make you play on
their excruciating terms. Never give them time.
Magicians and showmen are experts in forcing time. Houdini could
ofen wriggle fee of handcuffs in minutes, but he would draw the escape
out to an hour, making the audience sweat, as  time  came  to an apparent
standstll. Magicias have aways known that the best way to alter our per­
cepton of tme is ofen to slow down te pace. Creatng suspense brings
time to a terrifing pause: The slower the magician's hands move, the eas­
ier it is to create the illusion of speed, making people think the rabbit ha
appeared instantaneously. The great nineteenth-centry magician Jean-Eu­
gene Robert-Houdin took explicit notice of this effect: "The more slowly a
story is told," he said, "the shorter it seems."
Going slower also makes what you are doing more interesting-the
audience yields to your pace, becomes entranced. It is a state in which time
whizzes delight                                                                  lly by. You must practice such illusions, which share in te
hypnotist's power to alter perceptions of tme.
End Tme. You can play the game with the utmost artistry-waiting pa­
tiendy for the right moment to act, putting your competitors off their for
by messing with their timing-but it won't mean a thing unless you know
how to finish. Da not be one of those people who look like paragons of pa­
tience  but  are  actualy just afaid to bring things to  a dose: Patience is
worthless unless combined with a willingness to fall ruthlessly on your op­
ponent at the right moment. You can wait as long as necessary for the con­
dusion to come, but  when it comes it must come quickly.  Use  speed to
paralyze your opponent, cover up    any mistakes you might make, and im­
press people with your aura of authority and finality.
With the patence of a snake  charmer,  you draw the snake out with
calm and steady rhythms; Once the snae is out, though, would you dagle
your foot above its deadly head? There is never a good reason to allow te
298                                                                              LAW 35

slightest hitch in your endgame. Your mastery of timing can really only be
judged by how you work with end time-how you quickly change the pace
ad bring things to a swift and definitive conclusion.
Image: The Hawk. Patiently and silently it circles the sky, high
above, all-seeing with its powerful eyes. Those below have
no awareness that they are being tracked. Suddenly,
when  the moment arrive s, the hawk swoops
down  with  a  speed that  cannot  be  de-
fe nded  again st;  before  its  prey
knows   what  has  happened,
the bird's viselike talons
have  carried it
up into the
sky.
Authority: There is a tide in the affairs of men, / Which, taen at the flood,
leads on to fortune; / Omitted, all the voyage of their life / Is bound in
shallows and in miseries. (Iulius Caesar, William Shakespeare, 1564-1616)
REVERSAL
Tere is no power to be gained in lettng go of the reins and adapting to
whatever time brings. To   some degree you must guide time or you will be
it merciless victim. There is accordingly no reversal to this law.

LAW
36
DISDAIN THINGS
YOU CANNOT HAVE :
IGNORING THEM IS
THE B EST REVEN GE
JUDGMENT
By    acknowldging a petty prblem you gve it existence
and credibility.  The more attention you pay an enemy,
the strnger you make him; and a small mistake is often
made worse and more visibl when you try to fix it. It is
sometimes best to leave things alone. I there is something
you want but cannot have, show contemptfor it. The lss
interest you reveal, the more superior you seem.
300

TRAN S G RE S S I O N  OF THE LAW
The Mexican rebel leader Pancbo Villa started out as the chief of a gang of
THE  F O X  A ' l)
badits,  but after revoluton broke  out in Mexico in  1910, he beca              e a
THE C R A I' E S
kind of folk hero-robbing trains and giving the money to the poor, lead­
A starving fox . . .
ing daring raids, ad chaming the ladies with romantc escapades. His ex­
saw a cluster
ploits  fascinated Americans-he  seemed a man  from another  era,  part          Gf luscious-looking
Robin Hood, part Don Juan. Afer a few years of bitter fighting, however,         grapes ofpurplish
luster
General Carranza emerged as the victor in the Revoluton; the defeated
Dangling above hir on
Villa and his toops went back hore, to the northem state of Chihuaua.
a trellis-frare.
His amy dwindled and he tumed to baditry again, damaging his popu­               He would have dearly
larity.  Finally, perhaps  out of desperation, he  began to  rail  against the   liked ther for his
                                                                                 lunch,
United States, the gringos, whom he blamed for his troubles.
                                                                                 But when he tried and
In March of 1916, Pacho Villa raided Columbus, New Mexico. Ram­                  failed to reaeh the
paging through the town, he and his gang killed seventeen American sol­          buneh:
diers and civilians. Pesident Woodrow Wilson, like many Americans, had           "Ah weil, it's rore than
likely they're not
admired Villa; now, however, the bandit needed to be punished. Wilson's
sweet-
avsers urged hir to send toops into Mexico  to  capture  Villa.  For  a
Good only for green
power as large as the United States, they agued, not to stike bac at an          fools to eat!"
ay that  had invaded its  territory would send the worst kind of signal.         Wasn 't he wise to say
Furthermore, they contnued, many Americas saw Wilson as a pacifist, a            they were unripe
Rather than whine
prnciple the public doubted as a response to violence; he needed to prove
and gripe?
his mettle and manliness by ordering the use of force.
FABLES,
The pressure on Wilson was stong, and before the month was out,                  JEAN DE LA FONTAINE,
wth the approval of the Carranza govemment,  he  sent an army of ten             1 621-1695
tousand soldiers to  capture Paco Villa.  The venture was  called the
Pnitive Expedition, and its leader was the dashing General John J. Persh­
ig, who had defeated guerrillas in the Philippines and Natve Americans
i the American Southwest. Certainly Pershing could find ad overpower
Pacho Villa.
The Punitive Expediton became a sensatonal story, and carloads of                Gnce when G. K.
U.S. reporters followed Pershing into acton. The campaign, they wrote,           Chesterton 's  eeonorie
would be  a test of American power. The  soldiers carried the  latest in         views were abused in
                                                                                 print by George
weaponry,  communicated by radio,  and were  supported  by  reconnais­
                                                                                 Bernard Shaw, his
sace from the air.                                                               friends waited in vain
In the first few months, the toops split up into smal units to comb the          for hir to reply.
Historian Hilaire
wlds of northem Mexico. The Americans offered a $50,000 reward for in­
Belloe reproaehed hir.
foration leading to  Villa's capture. But the Mexican people, who had
"My dear BeUoe, "
been disillusioned with Villa when he had retumed to baditry, now idol­          Chesterton said, "f
ied hir for facing this mighty American army. They began to give Persh­          have answered hir.
To   a ran of Shaw's
ig    false  leads:  Villa had been  seen in this village, or in that mountain
wit, silence is the one
hideaway, arplanes would be dispatcbed, troops would scurry after them,
unbearable repartee. "
ad no one would ever see hir. The wily bandit seemed to be always one
THE LITTLE, BRüWN
step ahead of the American militay.                                              BOOK OF ANECDOTES,
CLIFTON FADIMAN, ED.,
By the summer of that year, the expedition had swelled to  123,000
1985
men. They suffered through the stultfing heat, the mosquitoes, the wild
tran. Trudging over a countryside in which they were aready resented,
LAW 36                                                                           301

they infriated both the local people and the Mexican goverment. At one
point  Pancho Villa hid in  a mountain cave to  recover from a gunshot
TI IL                                                                          \                                                                                  S "'ll
wound he received in a skirmish with the Mexican amy; looking down
T I I E  C,\ IW                                                                I : ' I,: K
fom  his  aerie,  he  could  watch  Pershing  lead  the  exhausted  American
An ass had once by
troops back and forth  across  the mountains, never getting ay closer to
some aecident lost his
tai!, which was a griev­                                                       their goal.
ous afflietion to him;                                                         All the way into winter, Villa played his cat-ad-mouse game, Ameri­
and he was everywhere
                                                                               cans came to see the affair as a kind of slapstick face-in fact they began to
seeking after it, being
fool enough to think he                                                        admire  Villa again,  respecting his resourcefulness  in  eluding a superior
could get it set on                                                            force_ In January of 1917, Wilson finally ordered Pershing's withdrawal. As
again. He passed                                                               the troops made their way back to American territory, rebel forces pursued
through a meadow, and
them, forcing the US. Army to use airplanes to protect its rear flanks. The
afterwards got into a
Punitive Expediton was being punished itself-it had tured into a retreat
garden. The gardener
seeing him, and not                                                            of the most humiliatng sort.
able to endure the
mischief he was doing
Interpretation
in trampling down his
plants, fell into a                                                            Woodrow Wilson organized the Punitive Expedition as a show of force: He
violent rage, ran to the                                                       would teach Pancho Villa a lesson and in the process show the world that
ass, and ne ver standing
no one, lage or small, could attac the mighty United States and get away
on the ceremony of a
with it. The expediton would be over in a few weeks, and Villa would be
pillory, cut off both his
ears, and beat him out                                                         forgotten.
ofthe ground. Thus the                                                         That was not how it played out. The longer the expedition took, the
ass, who bemoaned the
more it focused attention on the Americas' incompetence and on Villa's
loss of his taU, was in
cleveress_ Soon what was forgotten was not Villa but the raid that had
far greater affiiction
when he saw himself                                                            stated it all. As a minor annoyance became an interational embarrass­
without ears.                                                                  ment, and the enraged Americans dispatched more toops, the imbalance
FABLES,                                                                        between the size of the pursuer and the size of the pursued-who still man­
PILPAY,
aged to stay free-made the affair a joke. And in the end  this  white  eIe­
INDIA,
FOlJRTH CENTlJRY                                                               phant of an army had to lumber out of Mexico, humiliated. The Punitive
Expedition did the opposite of what it set out to do: It lef Villa not only
free but more popular tha ever.
What could Wilson have done differently? He could have pressured
the Carranza government to catch Villa for him_ Alteratively, since many
Mexicans had tired of Villa before the Punitive Expedition began, he could
rm                                                                             : I'IW                                                                             IlIC\    0\   have worked quietly with them and won their support for a muc smaller
raid to capture the badit. He could have organized a trap on the Ameri­
Onee, when the Toku­
can side of the border, anticipating the next raid. Or he could have ignored
daiji minister of the
right was chiefof the                                                          the matter altogether for the time being, waiting for the Mexicans them­
imperial police, he was
selves to do away with Villa of their own accord.
holding a meeting of
Remember: You choose to let things bother you_ You can just as easily
his staff at the middle
gate when an ox                                                                choose not to notice the irritating offender, to consider the matter trivia
belonging to an official                                                       and unworthy of your interest. That is the powerfl move. What you do
named Akikane got                                                              not react to canot drag you down in a futle engagement. Your pride is not
loose and wandered
                                                                               involved. The best lesson you can teach an irritatng gnat is to consign it to
into the ministry build-
ing. It climbed up on                                                          oblivion by ignoring it. If it is impossible to ignore (Pancho Villa had in fact
                                                                               killed American citizens), then conspire in  secret to  do  away  with it, but
302                                                                            LAW 3 6

never inadvertently draw attention to the bothersome insect that will go           the dais where the chief
was seated and lay
away or die on its own. If you waste time ad energy in such entangle­
there, chewing its cud.
ments, it is your own fault. Lea                                                   to play the card of disdain and tur your
Everyone was sure that
back on what cannot harm you in the long run.                                      this was some grave
portent. and urged that
the ox be sent to a yin­
yang diviner. However.
Just think-it cost your government $130 million to try to get me. I took them
the prime minister, the
over rough, hilly countr. Sometims forfif   miles at a stretch the had no water    father ofthe minister of
the right, said, "An ox
The had nothing but the sun and mosquitoes                                         And nothing was gained.
has no discrimination.
Pancho Villa, 1 8 78-1 923
It has legs-there is
nowhere it won't go. It
does not make sense to
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW                                                              deprive an underpaid
                                                                                   official of the wretched
In the year 1527, King Henry VII I  of England decided he had to find a
                                                                                   ox he needs in order to
way  to get rid of his wife, Catherine ofAragon. Catherine had failed to pro­      attend court. " He
duce a son, a male heir who would ensure the contnuance of his dynasty,            retured the ox to its
owner and changed the
ad Henry thought he knew why: He had read in the Bible the passage,
maUing on which it had
"And if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath
lain. No untoward
ucovered his brother's naedness; they shall be cildless." Before marry­            event of any kind
ig Henry, Catherine had married his older brother Arthur, but Arthur               occurred afterward.
They say that if you see
had died five months later. Henry had waited an appropriate tme, then
a prodigy and do not
had married his brother's widow.
treat it as such, its char­
Catherine was the daughter of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of                 acter as a prodigy is
Spain, and by marrying her Henry had kept aive a valuable alliance. Now,           destroyed.
however, Catherine had to assure hir that her brief marriage with Arthur           ESSAYS IN IDLENESS,
                                                                                   KENKO,
had never been consummated. Otherwise Henry would  view  teir rela­                JAPAN,
tonship as incestuous and their marriage as null and void.  Catherine in­          FOURTEENTH CENTURY
sisted that she had remained a virgin through her marriage to Arthur, and
Pope Clement VII supported her by giving his blessing to the union, which
he could not have done had he considered it incestuous. Yet after years of
marriage to Henry, Catherine had failed to produce a son, and in the early
1520s she had entered menopause. To    the king this could only mean one
ting:  She had lied  about her virginity, teir union was incestuous, and
Gd had punished them.
There was another reason why Henry wanted to get rid of Catherine:
He had fallen in love with a younger woman, Anne Boleyn. Not only was
he in love with her, but if he married her he could still hope to sire a legiti­
mate son. The marriage to Caterine had to be annulled. For this, how­
ever, Henry had to apply to the Vatcan. But Pope Clement would never
annul the marriage.
By the summer of 1527, rumors spread throughout Europe that Henry
was  about  to   attempt  the   impossible-to   annul  his  marriage   aganst
Clement's wishes.  Catherine  would never abdicate, let alone voluntarily
enter a nunnery, as Henry had urged her. But Henry had his own strategy:
He stopped sleeping in the same bed with Catherine, since he considered
her his sister-in-Iaw, not his law                                                 l wife. He insisted on calling her Pincess
LAW 36                                                                             303

Dowager o f  Wales, her title as Arthur's widow. Finally, in  153 1, h e  ban­
ished her from court and shipped her off to a distant caste. The pope or­
And in this view it is
dered rum to retur her to court, on pain of excommunicaton, the most
advisable to let everyone
of your acquaintance­                                                            severe penalty a Catholic could suffer. Henry not only ignored tis threat,
whether man or                                                                   he insisted that his mariage to Catherine had been dissolved, and in 1533
woman-feel now and
he married Anne Boleyn.
then that you could
Clement refsed to recognize the marriage, but Henry did not care.
very welt dispense with
their company. This                                                              He no longer  recognized the pope's authorit, and proceeded to  brea
will consolidate                                                                 with the Roman Catholic Church, establishing the Church of England in
friendship. Nay, with
its stead, with the king as te head of the new church. And so, not surpris­
most people there will
ingly, the newly formed Church of Englad proclaimed Anne Boleyn Eng­
be no harm in occa­
sionalty mixing a grain                                                          land's rightful queen.
of disdain with your
The pope tied every threat in the book, but nothing worked. Henry
treatment ofthem; that
                                                                                 simply ignored                                                               h                                                                           .   Clement fumed-no one had ever teated                                     h   so con­
will make them value
your friendship alt the                                                                                                                                                                                                                   temptuously. Henry had humiliated hir and he had no power of recourse.
more. Chi non stima                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Even excommunicaton (which he constantly threatened but never carried
vien stirato, as a                                                                                                                                            out) would no longer matter.
subtle Itahan proverb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Catherine too feit the devastating sting of Henry's disdain. She tried to
has it-to disregard is
to win regard. But ifwe                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fight back, but in appeaing to Henry her words fell on deaf ears, and soon
realty think very highly                                                                                                                                                                                                                  they fell on no one's. Isolated from te court, ignored by the king, mad
of a person, we shoutd
with anger and fustration, Catherine slowly deteriorated, and finaly died
conceal it from hir
in January of 1536, from a cancerous tumor of the heart.
hke a crime. This is not
a very gratifying thing
to do, but it is right.                                                          Interpretation
Why, a dog will not
When you pay attention to a person, te two of you become parters of
bear being treated too
sorts, each moving in  step to  te  actons and reactions of  the other. In  te
kindly, let alone a man!
process you lose your initative. It is a dynamic of all interactions: By ac­
ARTHUR
SCHOPENHAUER.                                                                    knowledging other people, even i only to fight with them, you open your­
1 788-1860
self to their influence. Had Henry locked hors with Caterine, he would
have found hirself mired in endless aguments that would have weaened
his resolve and eventually wor rm down. (Catherine was a strong, stub­
bor woman.) Had he set out to convince Clement to change rus verdict on
the marriage's validity, or tried to compromise and negotiate with hir, he
'1' 1 1 1':                                                                      \10""f:\  A 1 1                                                              would have gotten bogged down in Clement's favorite tactic: playing for
                                                                                 '!' I I I-:  P I':'IS                                                        tme, promising flexibility, but actually gettng what popes always got­
A monkey was carry­                                                                                                                                           their way.
ing two handfuts of                                                                                                                                           Henry  would  have  none  of  this.  He  played  a  devastatng  power
peas. One httle pea
game-total disdain. By ignoring people you cancel them out. This unset­
dropped out. He tried
tles ad infuriates them-but since tey have no dealings with you, there is
to pick it up, and spilt
twenty. He tried to pick                                                         no thing they can do.
up the twenty, and spilt                                                         This is the offensive aspect of the law. Playing the card of contempt is
them alt. Then he lost
immensely powerfu, for it lets you determine the conditions of the conict.
his temper scattered the
The war is waged on your terms. This is the ultmate power pose: You are
peas in alt direclions,
                                                                                 and ran away.                                                                the king, and you ignore what offends you. Watch how tis tactic infriates
                                                                                 FABLES.                                                                      people-half of what they do is t get your attention, and when you wit­
                                                                                 LEO TOLSTOY.
                                                                                                                                                              hold it from them, they flounder in frustation.
                                                                                 1828-1910
304                                                                              LAW 3 6

MAN Kick him-he'ljor{ve you. Fatter him-he may or may not
see through you. But ignore him and he 'l hate you.
As some make gossip
Idries Shah, Caravan of Dreams, 1 968
out of everything, su
others make much ado
about everything. They
are always talking big,
KEYS TO POWER
fand] take everything
Desire ofen creates paradoxical effects: The more you wat something,
seriously, making a
te more you chae ater it, the more it eludes you. The more interest you          quarrel and a mystery
show, the more you repel the object of your desire. This is because your in­     of it. You should take
very few grievances to
terest is too stong-it makes people awkward, even fearful. Uncontrol­
heart, for to do so is 10
lable desire makes you seem weak, unworthy, pathetic.
give yourself ground.
You need to tur YOU back on what you wat, show your contempt                     less wurry. It is a topsy­
ad disdain. This is the kind of powerfl response that will drive your tar­       turvy way of behaving
                                                                                 to take tu heart eares
gets crazy. They will respond with a desire of their own, which is simply to
                                                                                 which you ought to
have an effect on you-perhaps to possess you, perhaps to hurt you. If tey        throw over your shoul­
wat to possess you, you have successfully completed the first step of se­        der. Many things whieh
seemed important [at
duction. If they want to hurt you, you have unsettled them ad made them
the time] turn out to be
play by your rules (see Laws 8 and 39 on batng people into action) .
ofno aecount when
Contempt is the prerogatve of the king. Where his eyes tur, what he              they are ignored; and
decides to see, is what has reality; what he ignores ad turs his bac on is       othen', whieh seem
trifiing, appear formi­
a good as dead. That was te weapon of King Louis XIV-if he did not
dable when you pay
like you, he acted as if you were not there, maintaining his superiority by
attentiun tu them.
cutting off te dynamic of interaction. This is the power you have when           Things ean easily be
you play the card of contempt, periodically showing people that you ca           settled at the outset, but
not so later on. In
do without them.
many cases, the remedy
If choosing to ignore enhaces your power, it follows that the opposite
itself is the cause 0/ the
approach-commitment and engagement-ofen weaens you. By paying                    disease: to let things be
undue attenton to a puny enemy, you look puny, and the longer it taes            is not the least satisjac­
tory of life:s ru/es.
you to crush such a enemy, the larger the enemy seems. When Athens set
BALTASAR GRACIAN,
out to conquer the island of Sicily, in 415 B.C., a giat power was attacking a
1601-1658
tny one. Yet by entangling Athens in a long-drawn-out conflict, Syracuse,
Sicily's most important city-state, was ahle to grow in stature ad confi­
deuce. Finally defeatng Athens, it made itself famous for centuries to
core. In recent tmes, President John F Kennedy made a similar mistae
i his attitude to Fidel Casto of Cuha: His faled invasion at the Bay of
Pgs, in 1961, made Castro a interatona hero.
A second danger: If you succeed in crushing the irritant, or even if you
merely wound it, you create sympathy for the weaker side. Critcs of
Fraklin D. Roosevelt complained bitterly about the money his adminis­
taton spent on goverment projects, hut their attacs had no resonace
wth the puhlic, who saw the president as working to end the Great De­
pression. His opponents thought they had an example that would show just
how wastefl he had hecome: his dog, Fala, which he Iavished with favors
ad  attention.  Critics railed  at  his  insensitvity-spending  taxpayers'
money on a dog while so many Americas were stll in poverty. But Roo­
sevelt had a response: How dare his critcs attack a defenseless Httle dog?
LAW 36                                                                           305

His speech in defense o f Faa was one of te most popular h e  ever gave, In
this case, the weak party involved was the president's dog and te attack
TIF \IA" AIIl
backfired-in the long run, it only made the president more sympathetic,
1I1S SIIAIH)\
                                                                                since  many  people                                                              w                                                                                                                    naturally  side with  the  "underdog," just  as  the
There was a certain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                American public came to sympatize wit the wily but outnumbered Pan­
original man who
desired to catch his                                                            cho Villa,
own shadow. He makes                                                                                                                                             It is tempting to want to                      f                                                                     our mistakes, but the harder we try, te
a step or two toward it,
worse we  often make them,  It  is  sometmes more politc to  leave them
but it moves away from
alone, In 1971, when te New lrk Times published the Pentagon Papers, a
hir. He quickens his
pace; it does the same.                                                         group of goverment documents about te history of U.S, involvement in
At last he takes to                                                             Indochina, Henry Kissinger erupted into a volcanic rage, Furious about te
running; but the
Nixon  administation's vulnerability  to   this  kind  of  damaging  lea,  he
quicker he goes, the
made recommendations tat  eventually led to  the  formaton of a group
quicker runs the
shadow also, utterly                                                            called the Plumbers to plug the leas. This was te unit tat later broke into
refusing to give itself
Democratic Party offices in te Watergate Hotel, settng off the  chain of
up, just as if it had been
events that led to Nixon's downfal. In reaity the publicaton of the Penta­
a treasure. But see! our
eccentric friend                                                                gon Papers was  not a serious threat to the administation, but Kissinger's
suddenly turns round,                                                           reacton made it a big deal.  In tying t f one problem, he created an­
and walks away from                                                             other: a paranoia for security that in the end was much more destuctive to
it. And presently he
                                                                                the goverment Had he  ignored te  Pentagon Papers, the scanda tey
looks behind hir; now
the shadow runs                                                                 had created would eventually have blown over,
after hir.                                                                      Instead  of inadvertenty focusing attenton on a problem,  making it
Ladies fair, I have
seem worse by  publicizing how much concer and  axiet it is  causing
often observed . . . that
you, it is ofen far wiser to play the contemptuous aristocrat, not deigning
Fortune treats us in a
similar way. One man                                                            to acknowledge the problem's existence, There are several ways to execute
tries with all his might                                                        this stategy.
to seize the goddess,
First there is the sour-grapes approach. I there is something you want
and only loses his time
but tat you realize you cannot have, the worst thing you can do is draw at­
and his trouble.
Another .Ieem.l, to alt                                                         tention  to  your  disappoint                                                    ent  by  complaining  about it  A infinitely
appearance, to he                                                               more powerful tactic is to act as if it never realy interested you in te first
running out of her
place. When the writer George Sand's supporters nominated her to be the
sight; hut, no: .Ihe
first female member of te Academie Fran(ase, in 1861, Sand quickly saw
herself takes a plea.llIre
in p"r.luing hirn.                                                              that the academy would never admit her. Instead of whining, though, she
FAHLES,                                                                         claimed she  had no interest in belonging to this group  of wor-out, over­
IVAN KRILOFr,
rated, out-of-touch windbags. Her disdain was  the perfect response: Had
1 76R-1844
she shown her anger at her exclusion, she would have revealed how muc
it meat to her. Instead she branded the academy a club of old men-and
why should she be agry or disappointed at not having to spend her time
wit them? Crying "sour grapes" is sometmes seen as a reflection of te
wea; it is actually the tactic of te powerfl.
Second, when you are attacked by an inferior, deflect people's atten­
tion by making it clear that the attac ha not even registered. Look away,
or answer sweetly, showing how little the  attac concers you. Similarly,
when you yourself have committed a blunder, the best response is often to
make less of your mistae by teating it lighty.
The Japanese emperor Go-Saiin, a great disciple of the tea ceremony,
306                                                                             LAW 36

owned a priceless antique tea bowl that all the courtiers envied. One day a
gest, Dainagon Tsunehiro, asked if he could carry the tea bowl into the
light, to examine it more closely. The bowl rarely left the table, but the em­
peror was in good spirits and he consented. As Danagon carried the bowl
to the railing of the veradah, however,  and  held it up to  the  light,  it
slipped from his hands and fell on a rock in the garden below, smashing
into tiny fragments.
The emperor of course was furious. "It was indeed most clumsy of me
to let it drop in this way," said Dainagon, with a deep bow,  "but really
tere is not much harm done. This Ido tea-bowl is a very old one and it is
impossible to say how much longer it would have lasted, but anyhow it is
not a thing of any public use, so I think it rather fortunate that it has broken
tus." This  surprising response  had  an  immediate  effect:  The  emperor
calmed down. Dainagon neither sniveled nor overapologized, but signaled
his own worth and power by treating his mistae with a touc of disdain.
The emperor had to respond with a similar aristocratic indifference; his
ager had made hir seem low and petty-an image Dainagon was able to
manipulate.
Among equals this tactic might backfire : Your indifference could make
you seem callous. Eut with a master, if you act quickly ad without great
fss, it can work to great effect: You bypass his angry response, save hir
te time and energy he would waste by brooding over it, ad allow hir the
opportunity to display his own lac of pettiness publicly.
If we make excuses and denials when we are caught in a mistae or a
decepton, we stir the waters and make the situation worse. It is ofen wiser
to play things the opposite way.  The Renaissance writer Pietro Aretino
often boasted  of his  aristocratic lineage, which  was,  of course,  a ficton,
sice he was actually the son of a shoemaker. When an enemy of his finally
revealed  the  embarrassing truth,  word  quickly spread,  and  soon  all  of
Venice  (where he lived at the time) was aghast at Aretino's lies. Had he
tied to defend hirself, he would have only dragged hirself down. His re­
sponse was masterfl: He announced that he was indeed the son of a shoe­
maer, but this only proved his greatness, since he had risen from the
lowest stratum of society to its very pinnacle .  From then on he never men­
toned his previous lie, tumpetng instead his new position on the matter
of his ancestry.
Remember: The powerfl responses to niggling, petty annoyances and
iritations are contempt and disdan. Never show that something has af­
fected you, or that you are offended-that only shows you have acknowl­
edged a problem. Contempt is a dish that is best served cold and without
aectation.
LAW 36                                                                             307

Image :
The Tiny
Wound.
It is small but painful and irritating. You
try  all  sorts  of medicaments,  you  com­
plain, you scratch and pick at the scab.
Doctors only make it worse, transforming
the tiny wound into a grave  matter.  If only
you  had left the  wound  alone, letting time
heal  it  and  freeing  yourself  of  worry.
Authority: Know how to play the card of contempt. It is the most pohtic
kind of revenge.  For there  are many  of whom we  should  have known
no thing if their  distinguished opponents  had  taken  no notice  of them.
There is no revenge hke oblivion, for it is the entombment of the unwOf­
thy in the dust of their own nothingness.  (Baltasar  Graciän,  160 1 - 1658)
REVERSAL
You must play the card of contempt with cae ad delicacy. Most small
toubles will vaish on their own if you leave them be; but some will grow
and fester unless you attend to them. Ignore a person of inferior stature and
the next time you look he has become a serious rival, and your contempt
has  made  hir vengefl  as weIl.  The great princes of Renassace Italy
chose to ignore Cesare Borgia at the outset of his career as a young general
in the amy of his father, Pope Alexader VI. By the time they paid atten­
ton it was too late-te cub was now a hon, gobbling up chunks of Italy.
Often, ten, while you show contempt publicly you will also need to keep
an eye on the problem privately, monitoring its status ad maing sure it
goes away. Do not let it become a cancerous cello
Develop the skill of sensing problems when tey are stll small ad
taking care of them before they become intactable. Lea                          to  distnguish
between the potentaly disastous and the mildly irritatng, te nuisace
that will quietly go away on its own. In eiter case, tough, never com­
pletely tae your eye off it. As long as it is alive it can smolder and spak
into life.
308                                                                             LAW 3 6

LAW
37
CREATE C OMPELLING
SPECTACLES
JUDGMENT
Strking imagery and grand symolie gestures create the
aur oJ power-everyone responds to them. Stage specta­
eis Jor those arund you, then, Juli oJ arresting visuals
and rdiant symbols that heighten your presenee. Daz­
zled b apearnees,  no one will notiee what you ar
really doing.
309

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
In the early 1780s, word spread through Berlin of the strange and spectacu­
,\\TO,\                                                                               \\1) (,I,i':(}J'\r,\
lar medical practice of a Dr. Weisleder. He performed his miracles in an
She relied above all
enormous converted beer hall,  outside which Berliners began  to      notice
upon her physical pres­
ever longer lines of people-the blind, the lame, anyone with a illness in­
ence and the spell and
enchantment which it                                                                  curable by normal medicine. When it leaked out that the doctor worked by
could create, , , , She                                                               exposing the patient to the rays of the mo on, he soon became dubbed The
came sailing up the
Moon Doctor of Berlin.
river Cydnus in a barge
Sometme in 1783, it was reported that Dr. Weisleder had cured a well­
with a poop of gold, its
purpie sails billowing                                                                to-do woman of a terrible ailment. He suddenly became a celebrity. Pevi­
in the wind, while her                                                                ously only the poorest Berliners  had been  seen waiting outside  the beer
rowers caressed the
hall in their rags; now magnificent carriages were parked outside, and gen­
water with oars of
tlemen in frock coats, ad ladies with enormous coiffres, lined the street
silver which dipped in
time tu the music of the                                                              a sunset drew near.  Even folk with the mildest of ailments came, out of
flute, accompanied by                                                                 sheer curiosity. As  they waited in  line, the poorer clients would explain to
pipes ami lutes,
                                                                                      the gentlemen and ladies tat the doctor only practiced when the moon
Cleopatra herself
rec!ined beneath a                                                                    was in its increscent phase. Many would add that they themselves had al­
canopy of cloth of                                                                    ready been exposed to the healing powers he called forth from the rays of
gold, dressed in the                                                                  the moon. Even those who feIt cured kept coming back,  drawn  by  this
character ofAphrodite,
powerfl experience.
as we see her in paint­
ings, while on either                                                                 Inside the beer hall, a strange and stirring spectacle greeted the visitor:
side to complete the                                                                  Packed into te entrance hall was a crowd of all classes and etnic bac­
picture stood boys
grounds, a veritable Tower of Babel. Through tall windows on the norther
costumed as Cupids
side of the hall, silvery moonlight poured in at odd angles. The doctor and
who woled her with
their fam: Instead of a                                                               his wife, who, it seemed, was aso able to effect the cure, practiced on te
crew the barge was                                                                    second floor, which was reached by a stairway, at the end of the hall. As te
lined with the most
line edged closer to  the stairs, the sick would hear shouts and cries fom
beautiful of her wait­
above, and word would spread of, perhaps,  a blind gentleman suddenly
ing-women attired as
Nereids and Graces,                                                                   able to see.
some at the rudders,                                                                  Once upstairs, the line would fork in two directions, toward a nort­
others at the tackle of
em room for the doctor, a southem one for his wife, who worked only on
the sails, lind all the
the ladies. Finally, after hours of   anticipation and waiting in    line, the gen­
while an indescribably
rieh perfume, exhaled                                                                 tlemen patents would be  led before the  amazing doctor hirself,  an el­
from innumerable                                                                      derly man with a few stalks of wild gray hair and an air of nervous energ.
censers, was wafted
He would tae the patient (let us say a young boy, brought in by his fa­
from the vessel to the
ther), uncover the afflicted body part, and lif the boy up  to  the window,
riverbanks, Great
multitudes accompa­                                                                   which faced the light of the moon. He would rub the site of the injury or
nied this royal                                                                       illness,  mumble  something unintelligible,  look knowingly  at  the  mo on,
progress, some of them
and then, after collecting his fee, send the boy and his father on their way.
following the queen on
Meanwhile, in the  south-facing room, his wife would be  doing the  same
both sides of the river
from its very mouth,                                                                  with the ladies-which was odd, really, since the moon cannot appear in
while others hurried                                                                  two places at once; it cannot have been visible, in other words, from both
down from the city of
windows. Apparenty the  mere  thought,  idea, and  symbol of the  moon
Tarsus to gaze at the
were  enough, for  the ladies  did  not  complain,  and would later  remark
sigM Gradually the
crowds drified away                                                                   confidently that the wife of the Moon Doctor had the same healing powers
from the marketplace,                                                                 as he.
310                                                                                   LAW 37

Interpretation                                                                   where Antony awaited
the queen enthroned on
Dr. Weisleder may have known noting about medicine, but he under­
his tribunal, unti! at last
stood human nature. Re recognized tat people do not always want words,
he was left sitting quite
or rational explanations, or demonstratons of the powers of science; they        alone. And the word
want an immediate appeal to their emotions. Give them that and they will         spread on every side
                                                                                 that Aphrodite had
do te rest-such as imagine they can be healed by the light reflected from
                                                                                 come to revel with
a rock a quarter million miles away. Dr. Weisleder had no need of pills, or      Dionysus for the
of lengthy lectures on the moon's power, or of any silly gadgety to amplif       happiness of Asia.
its rays. Re understood that the simpler the spectacle the better-just the       Antony then sent a
message inviting
moonlight pouring in fom the side, the  stairway leading to the heavens,
Cleopatra to dine with
ad the rays of the moon, whether directly visible or not. Any added ef­
him. But she thought it
fects might have made it seem that the moon was not strong enough on its         more appropriate that
he should come to her,
ow. And the moon wa strong enough-it was a magnet far fantasies, as it
and so, as he wished to
ha been throughout history. Simply by associatng hirself with the image
show his courtesy and
of the moon, the doctor gained power.                                            goodwill, he accepted
Remember: Your search for power depends on shortcuts. You must al­               and went. He found the
preparations made to
ways circumvent people's suspicions, their perverse  desire to  resist your
receive him magnificent
will. Images are an extremely effective shortcut: Bypassing the head, the
bey(md words, but
seat of doubt and resistance, they am staight for the heart. Overwhelming        what astonished him
te eyes, they create powernd associations, bringing people together and          most of all was the
extraordinary number
strring their emotons. With the white light of the moon in their eyes, your
of lights. 50 many of
trgets are blinded to the deceptions you practce.
these, it is said, were let
down from the roof
and displayed on all
sides at once, and they
OBSERVANCE OF TRE LAW 11
were arranged and
In 1536 the fture king Renri 1 1  o f France took his first mistress, Diane de
grouped in such inge­
Poitiers.  Diane  was thirty-seven  at the  tme,  and was the  widow of the      nious patterns in rela­
grand seneschal of Normandy. Renri, meawhile, was a sprightly lad of             tion to each other, some
in squares and some in
seventeen, who was just beginning to sow his wild oats. At first their union
eire/es, that they created
seemed merely platonic, with Renri showing an intensely spirital devo­
as brilliant a spectae/e
ton to Diane. But it soon became clear that he loved her in every way, pre­      as can ever have been
ferring her bed to that of his young wife, Catherine de' Medicis.                devised to delight
the eye.
In 1547 King Francis died and Renri ascended to the throne. This new
LlFE OF ANTONY.
situaton posed perils for Diane de Poitiers. She had just tumed forty-eight,
PLlJTARCH,
ad despite her notorious cold baths and rumored youth potions, she was           C. A.D. 46-120
beginning to show her age ; now that Renri was king, perhaps he would re­
t                                                                                to the queen's bed,  and do as other kings had done   choose mis­
tesses from the bevy of beauties who made the French court the envy of
Europe. Re was, after all, only twenty-eight, and cut a dashing figure. But
Diae did not give up so easily. She would continue to enthrall her lover,
a she had enthralled hir for the past eleven years.
In the Middle Ages the
Diane's secret weapons were symbols and images, to which she had al­             symbolist attitude was
ways paid great attention. Early on in her relatonship with Renri, she had       much more in evidence.
5ymbolism appears
created  a motif by intertwining her initials with  his,  to  symbolize their
as a sort of short cut of
union. The idea worked like a cham: Renri put this insignia everywhere-
thought. Instead of
on  his  royal robes,  on  monuments,  on  churches,  on the  facade  of the     hJOking for the relation
LAW 37                                                                           311

between two things by                                                         Louvre, then the roya palace i PariS. Diane's favorite colors were blac
following the hidden
and white, which she wore exclusively, and wherever it was possible the in­
detours of their causal
signia appeared i these colors. Everyone recognized the symbol and its
connexions, thought
makes a leap and                                                              meaning. Soon afer Renri took the trone, however, Diane went stll fr­
discovers their relation                                                      ter: She decided to identif herself with the Roma goddess Diana, her
not in the connexion
namesake. Diana was the goddess of the hunt, the taditona royal pastime
of cause and effects,
and the partcular passion of Renri. Equaly important, in Renaissance art
but in a connexion of
signijcation                                                                  she symbolized chastty ad purity. For a woman like Diane to identif her­
Symbolist thought                                                             self with ts goddess would instantly cal up those images in te court giv­
permits an injnity of
ing her a air of respectability. Symbolizing her "chaste" relationship with
relations between
Renri, it would aso set her apart fom the adulterous liaisons of royal mis­
things. Each thing may
denote a number of                                                            tresses past.
distinct ideas by its                                                         To  effect this association, Diane began by completely tansforming her
different special quali­
castle at Anet. She razed the building's stuctre ad in its place erected a
ties, and a quality may
magnificent Doric-columned edifice modeled aer a Roman temple. I was
have several symbolic
meanings. The highest                                                         made in white Normady stone flecked wit black silex, reproducing
conceptions have                                                              Diane's tademark colors of black and white. The insignia of her and
symbols by the thou­
                                                                              Renri's initals appeaed on the columns, te doors, te windows, the car­
sand. Nothing is tao
humble to represent                                                           pet. Meawhile, symbols of Diana-crescent moons, stags, and hounds
and glory the sublime.                                                        adored  te gates  ad  facade.  Inside,  enormous  tapesties  depictng
The walnut signijes
episodes in te life of the goddess lay on the floors and hung on te walls.
Christ: the sweet kernel
In te garden stood the famous Goujon sculpture Diane Chasseresse, which is
is His divine nature, the
now in the Louvre, and which had a uncanny resemblance to Diane de
green and pulpy outer
peel is His humanity,                                                         Poitiers. Paintings and oter depictions of Diaa appeared in every corer
the wooden shell
of the castle.
between is the cross.
Anet overwhelmed Renri, who soon was tumpeting te image of
Thus all things raise
his thoughts to the                                                                                                                                        Diane de Poitiers as a Roman goddess. In 1548, when the couple appeared
eteral                                                                        Every                                                                        together in Lyons for a royal celebraton, the townspeople welcomed them
precious stone, besides
with a tableau vivant depictng a scene wit Diana te huntess. France's
its natural splendour
greatest poet of the period, Pierre de Ronsard, began to write verses in
sparkies with the bril­
liance of its symbolic                                                        honor of Diana-indeed a kind of cult of Diana sprag up, all inspired by
values. The assimilation                                                      the king's mistress. It seemed to Renri that Diae had given herself a kind
of roses and virginity is
of divine aura, and as if he were destned to worship her for te rest of his
much more than a
life. And untl his death, in 1559, he did remain faithfl to her-making her
poetic camparison, for
it reveals their common                                                       a duchess, giving her untold wealt, and displaying an almost religious de­
essence. As each nation                                                       voton to his first ad only mistess.
arises in the mind the
logic ofsymbolism
Interpretation
creates an harmony
ofideas.                                                                      Diane de Poitiers, a woma from a modest bourgeois background, man­
THE WANING OF THE                                                             aged to captivate Renri for over twenty years. By te time he died she wa
MIDDLE AGES,
weH into her sixties, yet his passion for her only increased wit the years.
JOHAN HUIZINGA,
1 928                                                                         She knew te king well. Re was not a inteHectual but a lover of the out­
doors-he partcularly loved jousting touraments, with their bright pen­
nants, brillianty caparisoned horses, and beautfuly dressed women.
Renri's love of visual splendor seemed childlike to Diane, ad she played
on this weakness of his at every opportunity.
312                                                                           LAW 37

Most astute  of all was Diane's appropriation of te goddess Diana.
Here she took the game beyond physica imagery into the realm of the psy­
There was a man
chic symbol. It was quite a feat to tansform a king's mistess into an em­
named Sakamotoya
blem of power and purity, but she managed it. Without the resonance of              Hechigwan who lived
the goddess, Diae was merely an aging courtesan. With the imagery and               in upper Kyoto
When [Emperor]
symbolism of Diana on her shoulders, she seemed a mythic force, destned
Hideyoshi gave his
for  greatness.
great Cha-no-yu [tea
You too can play with images like these, weaving visual clues into an               ceremony] meeting at
encompassing gestalt, as Diae did with her colors and her insignia. Estab­          Kitano in the tenth
                                                                                    month of 1588, Hechig­
lish a tademark like these to set yourself apart. Then take the game fr­
                                                                                    wan set up a great red
ter:  Find  an  image  or  symbol  from the  past that  will  neatly  fit your      umbrella nine feet
situation, ad put it on your shoulders like a cape. It will mae you seem            across mounted on a
larger than life.                                                                   stick seven feet high.
The circumference of
the handle he
Because of the light it shines on the other stars which make up a kind of
surraunded for about
court around it, because of the just and equal distribution of its mys to           two feet by a reed fence
in such a way that the
alt alike, because of the good it brings to alt places, producing life, joy
rays of the sun were
and action, because of its constancy from which it never varies, I chose
refiected fram it and
                                                                                    the sun as the most magnificent image to represent a geat leader                                   diffused the colour of
                                                                                    Louis XlV the Sun King, 1 638-1 715                                                                the umbrella all
                                                                                                                                                                                       around. This device
                                                                                                                                                                                       pleased Hideyoshi so
                                                                                                                                                                                       much that he remitted
KEYS TO POWER                                                                                                                                                                          Hechigwan's taxes as a
                                                                                    Using words to plead your case is risky business: Words are dangerous in­                          reward.
st                                                                                  ments, and ofen go astay. The words people use to persuade us virtu­                               CHA-NO-YU:
                                                                                                                                                                                       THE JAPANESE TEA
                                                                                    aly invite us to reflect on tem with words of our OW                        ; we mull them over,   CEREMONY,
                                                                                    ad ofen end up believing the opposite of what they say. (That is part of                           A. L. SADLER,
1962
our perverse nature.) It also happens that words offend us, stirring up asso­
ciations unintended by the speaker.
The visual, on the other hand, short-circuits the labyrinth of words. It
stikes with an emotional power ad immediacy that leave no gaps for re­
flection  and  doubt.  Like  music,  it leaps  right  over  rationa,  reasonable
toughts. Imagine the Moon Doctor tying to make a case for his medical
practce, trying to convince the unconverted by telling them about the
healing powers of the moon, and about his owo special connection to a dis­
tant object in the sky. Fortnately for hir, he was able to create a com­
pelling spectacle that made words unnecessary. The moment his patents
entered the beer hall, the image of te moon spoke eloquently enough.
Understand: Words put you on the defensive. If you have to explain
yourself your power is already in queston. The image, on te other hand,
imposes itself as a given. It discourages questions, creates forcehll associa­
tions,   resists   unintended   interpretations,   communicates   instantly,   ad
forges bonds tat transcend socia differences. Words str up  arguments
and divisions; images bring people togeter. They are the quintessentia in­
st                                                                                  ments of power.
The  symbol  has  te  same force, whether it is visual  (the statue of
LAW 37                                                                              313

Diana) or a verbal description of something visua (the words "te Sun
King"). The symbolic object stands for something else, something abstact
(such as the image "Diana" standing for chastity). The abstract concept­
purity, patriotism, courage, love-is full of emotonal and powerfl associa­
tons.  The  symbol is  a shortcut  of expression,  containing dozens of
meaings in    one simple phrase or object. The symbol of the Sun King,           a
explaned by Louis XIV, can be read on may layers, but the beauty of it is
that its associatons reuired no explanaton, spoke immediately to his sub­
jects, distinguished him from all other kings, and conjured up a kind of
majesty that went far beyond the words themselves. The symbol contans
untold power.
The first step in using symbols and images is to understand the pri­
macy of sight among the senses. Before the Renaissance, it has been ar­
gued, sight and the other senses-taste, touch, and so on-operated on a
relatively equal plane. Since then, however, the visual has come to domi­
nate the oters, and is the sense we most depend on and tust. As Graciän
said, "The truth is generally seen, rarely heard." When the Rnaissance
painter Fra Filippo Lippi was a captured slave among the Moors, he won
his freedom by sketching a drawing of his master on a white wall with a
piece of charcoal; when the owner saw the drawing, he instantly under­
stood the power of a man who could make such images, and let Fra Lippi
go. That one image was far more powerfl than any argument the artist
could have made with words.
Never neglect the way you arrange things visually. Factors like color,
for example, have enormous symbolic resonance. When the con artist Yel­
low Kid Weil created a newsletter touting the phony stocks he was ped­
dling, he caled it the "Red Letter Newsletter" and had it printed, at
considerable expense, in    red ink. The color created a sense of urgency,
power, and good fortune. Weil recognized details like these a keys to de­
ception-as do modem advertisers and mass-marketers. If you use "gold"
in the title of anything you are tying to sell, for example, print it in gold.
.   Since the eye predominates, people will respond more to the color than to
the word.
The visual contains great emotional power. The Roma emperor Con­
stantine worshipped the sun as a god for most of his life; one day, though,
he looked up at the sun, and saw a cross superimposed on it. The vision of
the cross over the sun proved to hir the ascendancy of the new religion,
and he converted not just hirself but the whole Roma Empire to Chris­
tanity soon thereafter. All te preaching and proselytizing in the world
could not have been as powerfl. Find and associate yourself with the im­
ages ad symbols that will communicate in this immediate way today, and
you will have untold power.
Most effectve of al is a new combination-a fsion of images and sym­
bols that have not been seen together before, but that through their associ­
ation clearly demonstrate your new idea, message, religion. The creation of
new images and symbols out of old ones in this way has a poetc effect­
viewers' associations run rampant, giving them a sense of participation.
314                                                                              LAW 37

Visual images often appear in a sequence, and the order in whic they
appear creates a symbol. The first to appear, for instance, symbolizes
power; the image at the center seems to have central importance.
Near the end of World War 11, orders came down from General Eisen­
hower that American troops were to lead the way into Paris afer its liber­
aton from the Nazis. The French general Charles de Gaulle, however,
realized that this sequence would imply that the Americans now com­
maded the fate of France. Through much manipulation, de Gaulle made
certain that he and the French Second Armored Division would appear at
te head of the liberating force. The strategy worked: Afer he had success­
fuHy pulled off this stunt, the Allies started treating hir as the new leader
of an independent France. De Gaulle knew that a leader has to locate him­
self literally at the head of his troops. This visual association is crucial to the
emotional response that he needs to elicit.
Things change in the game of symbols: It is probably no longer possi­
ble to pose as a "sun king," or to wrap the matIe of Diana around you. Yet
you can associate yourself with such symbols more indirectIy. And, of
course, you can make your own mythology out of figures from more re­
cent history, people who are comfortably dead but stll powerfully associa­
tve in the public eye. The idea is to give yourself an aura, a stature that
your normal banal appearance simply will not create. By herself Diane de
Poitiers had no such radiant powers; she was as human and ordinary as
most of uso But the symbol elevated her above the human lot, and made
her seem divine.
Using symbols also has a courtier-like effect, since they are often gen­
ter than brutish words. The psychotherapist Dr. Milton H. Erickson al­
ways tried to find symbols and images that would communicate to the
patent in ways that words could not. When deaing with a severely trou­
bied patient, he would not question hir directIy but would talk about
something irrelevant, such as driving through the desert in Arizona, where
he practiced in the 1950s. In describing this he would eventually come to
a                                                                                     appropriate symbol for what he suspected was the man's problem. Ifhe
feIt the patient was isolated, say, Dr. Erickson would talk of a single iron­
wood tree, and how its isolation lef it battered by the winds. Maing an
emotional connection with the tee as a symbol, the patient would open up
more readily to the doctor's probing.
Use the power of symbols as a way to rally, animate, and unite your
toops or team. During the rebellion against the French crown in 1648,
tose loyal to the king disparaged the rebels by comparing them to the
slingshots (in French, fondes) that littIe boys use to frighten big boys. Cardi­
na de Retz decided to tur this disparaging term into the rebels' symbol:
The uprising was now known as the Fronde, and the rebels as fondeurs.
They began to wear sashes in their hats that symbolized the slingshot, and
te word became their rallying cry. Without it the rebellion might weIl
have petered out. Always find a symbol to represent your cause-te more
emotional associations, the better.
The best way to use images and symbols is to organize them into a
LAW 37                                                                                315

grand spectacle that awes people and distacts them fom unpleasant reai­
ties. This is easy to do: People love what is grad, spectacular, and larger
than life. Appeal to their emotons and they will flock to YOUf spectacle in
hordes. The visual is the easiest route to teir heats.
Image:
The Cross and the
Sun. Crucifixion and
total radiance. With one
imposed  over the  other,  a
new reality takes shape­
a new p o w e r  is in the
ascendant. The sym­
bol-no explanation
necessary.
Authority: The people are
always  impressed  by  the
superficial  appearance  of
things                                                                        The [princel should,
at fitting times of the year,
keep the people occupied
and distracted with festivities
and spectacles.                                                               (Niccolo
Machiavelli,                                                                  1469-1527)
REVERSAL
No power is made available by ignoring images ad symbols. There is no
possible reversal to tis law.
316                                                                           LAW 37

LAW
38
THIN K AS YOU LI KE
BUT BEHAVE LIKE
OTHERS
JUDGMENT
Iyou make a show of going against the times, flaunting
your unconventional ideas and unorthodox ways, people
will think that you only want attention and that you
look down upon them. The will find a way to punish
you for making them feel inferor. It is far safer to blnd
in and nurture the common touch. Share your orignal­
ity only with tolant fiends and those who are sure to
apreciate your uniqueness.
317

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Around the year 478 B.C., the city of Sparta sent an expediton to Persia led
IIII\                                                                           \\ I T I I T I I I  I·T.\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 by the young Spartan nobleman Pausanias. The city-states of Greece had
                                                                                \ \ 1 >  ' 1 ' 1':                                                                                                                                \   II ITI I
                                                                                1'1                                                                            11':                                                               \1.\ \ \       recently fought off a mighty  invasion  from  Persia,  and now Pausanias,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 along with allied ships from Athens, had orders to punish the invaders and
                                                                                Ir is easy 10 run info
                                                                                danger by Irying 10                                                                                                                                              win back the  islands  and  coastal towns  that  the  Persians  had  occupied.
                                                                                swinz againsl the                                                                                                                                                Both the Athenians and the Spartans had great respect for Pausanias-he
stream. Only a Socrales
had proven hirself as a fearless warrior, with a flair for the dramatic.
could allempl lo do
With  amazing  speed,  Pausanias  and his  troops  took  Cyprus,  then
Ihal. Disagreement is
regarded as offensive                                                           moved on  to  the  mainland of Asia Minor known as the  Hellespont and
because it is a condem-                                                         captured Byzantium (modem-day Istanbul) . Now master of part of the Per­
nalion ofthe views or
                                                                                sian empire, Pausanias began to show signs of behavior that went beyond
others; Ihe numhers of
the disgrunlled grow,                                                           his normal flamboyance. He appeared in public wearing pomades in his
on account eilher of                                                            hair and flowing Persian robes, and accompanied by a bodyguard of Eg           ­
some maller thai has                                                            tians. He held lavish banquets in which he sat in the Persian manner and
been Ihe objcct of
demanded to be  entertained. He stopped seeing his  old  friends, entered
ceflsure or  of .\(Jfne
into communication with the Persian King Xerxes, and al in all affected
person who Iws praised
it: Truth is for Ihe jl'W,                                                      the style and manner of a Persian dictator.
err(r is as usual as it is
Clearly power and success had gone to Pausanias's head. His army­
vulgar. Nor is Ihe wise
Athenians and Spartans                                                          aat first thought this a passing fancy: He had
man to he recognized
hy whal he says in the                                                          always been a bit exaggerated in his gestures. But when he flaunted his dis­
markelplace, for he                                                             dain for the Greeks' simple way of life, ad insulted the common Greek
speaks there not with
soldier, they began to feel he had gone too far. Although there was no con­
his own voice, bul wilh
crete evidence for this, rumors spread that he had gone over to the other
that of universal j(Jlly,
however much his                                                                side, and that he dreamed of becoming a kind of Greek Xerxes. To    quell
inmost Ihoughts may                                                             the possibility of mutiny, the Spartans relieved Pausanias of his commad
gainsay it: Thc wise
and called hir hore.
man avoids heing
Pausanias, however, contnued to  dress in the Persian style, even in
contradicted as sedu­
/ously as he avoids                                                             Sparta. After a few months he independently hired a trireme and retumed
contradicting; Ihe                                                              to the Hellespont, telling his compatiots he was going to continue the fght
puhlicity oI censure is
against the  Persians. Actually, however, he  had different plans-to make
withheld fronz Ihal
hirself ruler of all  Greece, with  the  aid  of Xerxes hirself. The  Spa       s
wh ich rcadi/y provokes
il. Thoughl is free; il                                                         dedared hir a public enemy and sent a ship to capture hir. Pausanias sur­
cannol and "hould not                                                           rendered, certain that he could dear hirself of the charges of treason. It
he coerced; relire into
did come out during the tial that during his reign as commander he had
Ihe sanctuary ofyour
offended his  fellow Greeks tme  and again, erecting monuments, for in­
si/ence and ifyou
somelime" allow your­                                                           stance, in his own name, rather than in those of the cities whose troops had
self 10 break il, do so                                                         fought alongside hir, as was the custom. Yet Pausanias proved right: De­
under Ihe aegis ofa
spite the evidence of his numerous contacts with the enemy, the Spartans
discreel few.
refused to imprison a man of such noble birth, and let hir go.
BALTASAR GRACIÄN,
16() 1                                                                          1 658                                                                          Now thinking hirself untouchable, Pausanias hired a messenger to
take a letter to Xerxes, but the messenger instead took the letter to     the
Spartan authorites. These men wanted to find  out more, so they had the
messenger arrange to meet Pausanias in a tempIe where they could hide
and listen behind a partiton.  What Pausanias  said  shocked them-they
had never heard such contempt for their ways spoken so brazenly by one
of their own-and they made arrangements for his immediate arrest.
818                                                                             LAW 38

On his way hore from the temple, Pausaias got word of what had
happened. He ran to another temple to hide, but the authorites followed
Bene vixit. qui bene
him there ad placed senties all around. Pausanias refsed to surrender.
latuit-"He lives weil
Unwilling to forcibly remove hir from the sacred temple, the authorities        who conceals himself
kept hir trapped inside, untl he eventually died of starvation.                 weil. "
OVID,
c. 43 B.C.-A.D. 1 8
Interpretation
At frst glance it might seem that Pausanias simply fell in love with another
culture, a phenomenon as old as time. Never comfortable with the asceti­
cism of the Spartans, he found hirself enthraled by the Persian love of
lury and sensual pleasure. He put on Persian robes and perfumes with a
sense of deliverance from Greek discipline and simplicity.
This is how it appears when people adopt a culture in which they were           Wise men [should beJ
                                                                                like coffers with douhle
not raised. Often, however, there is also something else at play: People
                                                                                bottoms: Which when
who flaunt their infatuation with a different culture are expressing a dis­     others look into, being
dain and contempt for their own. They are using the outwad appearance           opened, they see not all
that they hold.
of the exotic to separate themselves fom the common folk who unques­
SIR WALTER RALEIGH,
tioningly follow the local customs and laws, and to express their sense of
1554-1618
superiority. Otherwise they would act with more dignity, showing respect
for those who do not share their desires. Indeed their need to show their
difference so dramatically ofen makes them disliked by the people whose
beliefs  they challenge, indirectly and subtly, perhaps, but offensively
nonetheless.
As Thucydides wrote of Pausanias, "By his contempt for the laws and
\\ 111:,\ T I I E  \ AT E H S
his imitation of foreign ways he had made hirself very widely suspected of
\EHE Cl IA1CI·:1J
being unwilling to abide by normal stadards." Cultures have norms that
Once upon a time
reflect centuries of shared beliefs and ideas. Do not expect to scoff at such
Khidr, the teacher of
tings with impunity. You will be punished somehow, even if just through
Moses, cal/ed upon
isolation-a position of real powerlessness.                                     mankind with a warn­
Many of us, like Pausanias, feel the siren cal ofthe exotc, the foreign.        ing. At a certain date,
he said, all the water in
Measure and moderate this desire. Flaunting your pleasure in alien ways of
the world which had
tinking ad acting will reveal a different motiveto demonstrate your su­
not been specially
periorit over your fellows.                                                     hoarded, would disap­
pear. It would then be
rcnewed, with different
water, which would
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
drive men mad.
During the late sixteenth century, a violent reaction aganst the Potestant      Only one man listened
Reformation erupted in Italy. The Counter-Reformaton, as it was called,         to the meaning of this
advice. He colleeted
included its own version of the Inquisiton to root out all deviatons from
water and went to a
te Catholic Church. Among its victims was the scientist Galileo, but an
secure place where he
important thinker who suffered even greater persecution was the Domini­         stored it, and waited for
can monk and philosopher Tommaso Campaella.                                     the water to change its
character.
A follower of the materialist doctine of the Roman philosopher Epi­
On the appointed date
cums, Campanella did not believe in miracles, or in heaven and hell. The
the streams stopped
Church had promoted such superstitons, he wrote, to contol the common           running, the wells welt
folk by keeping them in fear. Such ideas verged on atheism, and Cam­            dry, and the man who
                                                                                had listened, seeing this
panella expressed them incautously. In 1593 the Inquisiton threw hir
                                                                                LAW 38                      319

happening, went to his                                                              into prison for his heretical beliefs. Six years later, as a form of pa         al re­
retreat and drank his
lease, he was confined to a monastery in Naples.
preserved water.
Southem Italy was contolled by Spain at the tme, and in  Naples
When he saw, fram his
security, the waterfalls                                                            Campaella became involved in  a plot to fight and throw out  these in­
again beginning to                                                                  vaders. His hope was to establish an independent republic based on his
fiow, this man
own ideas of utopia. The leaders of the Italian Inquisiton, working with
descended among the
their Spanish counterparts, had hir imprisoned again. This tme they aso
other sons of men. He
found that they were                                                                tortured hir, to discover the tue nature of his impious beliefs : He was sub­
thinking and talking in                                                             jected to the infamous l vegla, a torture in which he was suspended by his
an entirely different
arms in a squattng position a few inches above a seat studded with spikes.
way from before; yet
The posture was impossible to sustain, and in time the victim would end up
they had no memory of
what had happened,                                                                  sitting on  the spikes, which would tear his flesh at the slightest contact.
nor of having been                                                                  During these years, however,  Campanella leamed something about
warned. When he tried
power. Facing the prospect of execution for heresy, he changed his strat­
to talk to them, he real­
egy: He would not renounce his beliefs, yet he knew he had to disguise
ized that they thought
that he was mad, and                                                                their outward appearance.
they showed hostility or                                                            To    save his life, Campaella feigned madness. He let his inquisitors
compassion, not under­
                                                                                    imagine that his beliefs stemmed from a incontollable unsoundness of
standing.
At first he drank none                                                              mind. For a while the tortures continued, to see if his insaity was faked,
ofthe new water, but                                                                but in  1603 his  sentence was commuted to life  in prison.  The  first four
went back to his                                                                    years of this he  spent chained to a wall  in a underground dungeon. De­
concealment, to draw
                                                                                    spite such conditons, he contnued to write-although no longer would he
on his supplies, every
day. Finally, however,                                                              be so foolish as to  express his ideas directly.
he took the decision to                                                             One book of Campanella's, The Hispanic Monarchy, promoted the idea
drink the new water
that Spain had a divine mission to expand its powers around the world,
because he could not
and offered the Spanish king practical, Machiavelli-type advice for achiev­
bear the loneliness of
living, behaving and                                                                ing this. Despite his own interest in Machiavelli, the book in general pre­
thinking in a different                                                             sented ideas completely the opposite to his own.  The HispanicMonarchy was
way fram everyone
in fact a ploy, an attempt to show his conversion to orthodoxy in the bold­
else. He drank the new
est manner possible. It worked: In 1626, six years after its publicaton, te
water, and became like
the rest. Then he forgot                                                            pope finally let Campanella out of prison.
all about his own store                                                             Shortly  after  gaining  his  freedom,  Campaella wrote Atheism Con­
of special water, and
quered,  a  book  attacking ' free-thinkers,   Machiavellians,   Calvinists,   ad
his fellows began to
heretics of all stripes. The book is written i the form of debates in whic
look upon him as a
madman who had                                                                      heretics express their beliefs and are countered by arguments for the supe­
miraculously been                                                                   riority  of Catholicism.  Campanella  had  obviously  reformed-his  book
restored to sanity.
made that dear. Or did it?
TALES OF
The arguments in the mouths of the heretcs had never before been
THE DERVISHES,
IDRIES SHAH,                                                                        expressed with such verve and feshness. Petending to present their side
1967
only to knock it down, Ca                                                           paella actually summarized the case against
Catholicism with stiking passion. When he argued the other side, suppos­
edly his side, on the other hand, he resorted to stale dicbes and convoluted
rationales.  Brief and  eloquent,  the heretics' arguments seemed bold ad
sincere. The lengthy arguments for Catholicism seemed tiresome and un­
convincing.
Catholics who read the book found it disturbing and ambiguous, but
320                                                                                 LAW 3 8

tey could not claim it was heretical, or that Campanella should be re­
tmed to prison. His defense of Catholicism, after all, used arguments they
Never combat any
had used themselves. Yet in the years to come, Athei Conquered became a
man 's opinion; for
bible for atheists, Machiavellians and libertnes who used the arguments           though you reached the
Capanella had put in their mouths to defend their dangerous ideas. Com­           age of Methuselah, you
would never have done
bining an outward display of conformity with an expression of his true be­
setting him right upon
liefs in a way that his sympathizers would understad, Campanella showed
all the absurd things
tat he had leaed his lesson.                                                      that he believes.
It is also weil to avoid
correcting people :s
Interpretation
mistakes in conversa­
In the face of awesome persecution, Capaella devised three state­
äon, however good
gie moves that saved his hide, feed hir from prison, and allowed hir to           your intentions may be;
continue to express his beliefs. First he feigned madnessthe medieval             for it is easy to offend
                                                                                  people, and difficult, if
equivalent of disavowing responsibility for one's actons, like blaming
                                                                                  not impossible to mend
one's parents today. Next he wrote a book that expressed the exact oppo­          them.
site of his own beliefs. Finally, and most brilliantly of all, he disguised his   Ifyou feel irritated by
the absurd remarks of
ideas while insinuating them at the same time. It is a old but powerfl
two people whose
tek: You pretend to disagree with dangerous ideas, but in the course of
conversation you
your disagreement you give those ideas expression and exposure. You               happen to overhear,
seem to conform to the prevailing orthodoxy, but those who know will un­          you should imagine
that you are listening to
derstad the irony involved. You are protected.
the dialogue of two
It is inevitable in society that certain values and customs lose contact
fools in a comedy.
wit their original motives and become oppressive. And there will always           Probatum es!.
be those who rebel against such oppression, harboring ideas fa ahead of           The man who comes
into the world wirh the
teir time. As Campaella was forced to realize, however, there is no point
notion that he is really
in making a display of your dangerous ideas if they only bring you suffer­
going to instruct it in
ig and persecuton. Martyrdom serves no purposebetter to live on in an             matters of the highest
oppressive world, even to thrive in it. Meanwhie find a way to express            importance, may thank
his stars if he escapes
your ideas subtly for those who understad you. Laying your pearls before
wirh a whole skin.
swne will only bring you trouble.
ARTHUR
SCHOPENHAlJER,
1 788-1860
For a long time I have not said what I believed, nO do l ever believe
what I say, and if indeed sometimes I do happen to tell the truth,
I hide it among so many lies that it is hard to find.
Niccolo Machiavelli. in a letter to Francesco Guicciardini, May 1 7, 1521
KEYS TO POWER
We   all tell lies and hide our tue feelings, for complete fee expression is a
sodal impossibility. From an early age we leam to conceal our thoughts,
tlling the pricly and insecure what we know they want to hear, watcing
caefully lest we offend them. For most of us this is natural-there are ideas
and values that most people accept, and it is pointless to argue. We   believe
what we want to, then, but on the outside we wear a mask.
There are people, however, who see such restraints as an intolerable
ifringement on their freedom, and who have a need to prove the superi-
LAW 38                                                                            321

ority o f  their values and beliefs. I n  t e  end, though, their arguments con­
vince only a few and offend a great deal more. The reason arguments do
Tl I E  CITlZE'  .\'11
not work is that most people hold their ideas and values without thinking
TIII·: TIL\H: I . U: H
"                                                                                  about them. There is a strong emotional content in their beliefs : They re­
"Look around YUI,
                                                                                   ally do not want to have to rework their habits of thinking, and when you
said the citizen. " This is
the largest market in                                                              challenge  them,  whether  directly  through  your  arguments  or indirectly
the world. "                                                                       through your behavior, they are hostle.
"Oh surely not, " said
Wise and clever people lea                                                         early on that they can display conven­
the traveller.
tional behavior and mouth conventional ideas without having to believe i
" Weil, perhaps not
the largest, " said the                                                            them. The power these people gain from blending in is that of being lef
citizen, "bllt milch                                                               alone to have the thoughts they want to have, and to express them to te
the best. "
people  they  want  to  express them  to,  without suffering isolation  or os­
" You are certainly
tracism.  Once they have  established themselves in a position  of power,
wrong there, " said the
traveller. "I can tell                                                             they can try to convince a wider circle of the correctess of their ideas
yuu                                                                                perhaps working indirectly, using Campanella's strategies of irony and in­
They bllried the
sinuation.
stranger in the dllsk.
In the late fourteenth century, the Spanish began a massive persecu­
FAHLES,
ROHERT LOUIS                                                                       tion of the Jews, murdering thousands ad driving others out of the coun­
STEVENSON, 1850-1894
try. Those who remained in Spain were forced to convert. Yet over the next
three hundred years, the Spanish noticed a phenomenon that disturbed
them:  Many  of the  converts  lived  their  outward  lives  as  Catolics, yet
somehow managed to retain their Jewish beliefs, practicing the religion in
private. May of these so-called Marranos (originaly a derogatory term,
being the Spaish for "pig") attained high levels of govemment office, mar­
I[ Machiavelli had had                                                             ried into the nobility, and gave every appearance of Christian piety, only
a prince tor disciple,
to  be  discovered late in life  as practcing Jews.  (The  Spanish Inquisiton
the first thing he wOllld
was  specifically commissioned to  ferret them  out.)  Over the  years  tey
have recommended
him to do would have                                                               mastered the                                                                   a   of  dissimulation,  displaying  crucifixes  liberally,  giving
been to write a book                                                                                                                                                  generous   gifs   to   churches,   even   occasionally   maing   ant-Semitic
against Machiavellism.                                                                                                                                                remarks-and all the while maintaining their inner freedom and beliefs.
VOLTAIRE,
In society, the Marranos knew, outward appearances are what matter.
1694-1778
This remains true today. The strategy is simple: As Campanella did in writ­
ing Atheim Conquered, make a show of bIen ding in, even going so far as to
be the most zealous advocate of the prevailing orthodoxy. If you stick to
conventonal appearances in    public few will believe you think differently
in private.
Do not be so foolish as to imagine that in our own time the old ortho­
doxies are gone. Jonas Salk, for instance, thought science had gotten past
politics and protocol. And so, in his search for a polio vaccine, he broke all
the rules-going public with a discovery before showing it  to the scientc
community, taking credit for the vaccine without acknowledging the scien­
tists who had paved the way, making hirself a star. The public may have
loved hir but scientists shunned hir. His disrespect for his community's
orthodoxies  left  hir  isolated,  and  he  wasted  years  trying  to  heal  the
breach, and struggling for funding and cooperation.
Bertolt Brecht underwent a modem form of Inquisition-the House
322                                                                                LAW 38

Un-American Activities Committee-and approached it with considerable
caniness. Having worked off and on in the American film industry during
World War 11, in 1947 Brecht was summoned to appear before the commit­
tee to  answer questions on his suspected  Communist sympathies. Other
witers called before the committee made a point of attacking its members,
and of acting as belligerently as possible in order to gain sympathy for
temselves. Brecht,  on the  other hand, who had actually worked stead-
.  fastly for the Communist cause, played the opposite game: He answered
questions with ambiguous generalities that defied easy interpretation. Call
it te Campanella strategy. Brecht even wore a suit-a rare event for him­
and made a point of smoking a cigar during the proceedings, knowing that
a key committee member had a passion for cigars. In the end he charmed
te committee members, who let hir go scot-fee.
Brecht then moved to East                                                       Grmany, where he encountered a differ­
ent kind of Inquisition. Here the Communists were in power, and they crit­
icized his plays as decadent and pessimistic. He did not argue with them,
but made small changes in the performance scripts to shut them up. Mean­
while he managed to preserve the published texts as written. His outward
conformity in both cases gave hir the feedom to work unhindered, with­
out having to change  his thinking.  In the  end,  he made his way safely
trough  dangerous  times in different counties through the use of little
daces of orthodoxy, and proved he was more powerfl than the forces of
repression.
Not only do people of power avoid the offenses of Pausanias and Salk,
tey also leam to play the clever fox and feign the common touch. This has
been the ploy of con artsts and politicians throughout the centuries. Lead­
ers  like Julius Caesar and Franklin D. Roosevelt have overcome their nat­
ural aristocratic  stance  to  cultivate  a familiarity with the  common man.
They have expressed this familiaity in little gestures, often symbolic, to
show the people that their leaders shae popular values, despite their differ­
ent status.
The logical extension of this practice is the invaluable ability to be all
tings to  all people. When you go into society, leave behind your own
ideas  and values, and put on the mask that is most appropriate for the
goup in which you find yourself. Bismarck played this game successfully
for  years-there were people who vaguely understood what he was up to,
but not clearly enough that it mattered. People will swallow the bait be­
cause it flatters them to believe that you share their ideas. They will not
te you as a hypocrite if you are carefl-for how can they accuse you of
hyocrisy ifyou do not let them know exactly what you stad for? Nor will
tey see you as lacking in values. Of course you have values-the vaues
you share with them, while in their compay.
Authority: Do not give dogs what is holy; and do not throw
your pearls before swine,  lest they trample  them under
foot and  turn to attack you.  Oesus  Christ,  Matthew  7:6)
LAW 38                                                                          323

Image:
The    herd   shuns    the
The Black
black   sheep,   uncertain
Sheep.
whether or not it belongs
with  them.  So  it  stragles  be­
hind,   or  wanders  away  fom
the  herd,  where  it  is  comered
by   wolves   and  promptly   de­
vOUfed.  Stay  with  the  herd­
there is safety in numbers. Keep
your  differences   in   your
thoughts and not in YOUf fleece.
REVERSAL
The only tme it is worth stading out is when you already stand out­
when you ha  e achieved an unshaable position of power, and can display
YOUf difference fom others as a sign of the distance between you. As pres­
ident of the United States, Lyndon Johnson would sometimes hold meet­
ings  while  he  sat on the toilet. Since no  one  else either could or would
claim such a "privilege," Johnson was showing people that he did not have
to  observe  the  protocols  and  nicetes  of others.  The  Roman  emperor
Caligula played the same game: He would wear a woman's negligee, or a
bathrobe, to receive important visitors. He even went so far as to have his
horse elected consul. But it backfired, for the people hated Caligula, and
his gestures eventually brought his overthrow. The truth is that even those
who attain the heights of power would be better off at least affecting te
common touch, for at some point they may need popular support.
Finally, tere is always a place for the gadfly, the person who success­
fuHy defies custom and mocks what has grown lifeless in a culture. Osca
Wilde, for example, achieved considerable  social power on this founda­
tion: He made it clear that he disdained the usual ways of doing things, and
when he gave public readings his audiences not only expected him to in­
sult them  but  welcomed  it.  We  notice, however, that his  eccentric role
eventuaHy destroyed him. Even had he come to a better end, remember
that he possessed an unusual genius: Without his gif to amuse and delight,
his barbs would simply have offended people.
324                                                                             LAW 38

LAW
39
STIR UP WATERS
TO CATCH FISH
JUDGMENT
Anger and emotion are strtegcally counterprductive.
You must always stay calm and objective. But iyou can
mae your enemies angr whil staying calm yoursei
you ga in a decided advantage. Put your enemies offbal­
ance: Find the chink in their vanity thrugh which you
can rttl them and you hold the strings.
325

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In January of 1809, an agitated and anxious Napoleon hurried back to
ITA " 1  BA    I I I C I':\l1  \ 1,:
Paris from his Spanish was. His spies and confidants had confirmed a
CBI\I>,  I IIS                                                                  0\ \  'I  L,\
rumor that his foreign minister Talleyrand had conspired against hir wt
The Kyoto Shoshidai
Fouche, the minister of police. Immediately on arriving in the capital te
ftakura Suwo-no-kami
Shigemune was very                                                              shocked emperor summoned his ministers to the paace. Following them
fond of Cha-no-yu
into the meeting right after their arrival, he began pacing up and dow,
(the tea ceremony), and
and started rambling vaguely about plotters working against hir, specula­
used to grind his own
tea while sitting in the                                                        tors bringing down the stock market, legislators delaying his policies-ad
court as judge, And the                                                         his own ministers undermining hir,
reason was this. He                                                             As Napoleon talked, Talleyrand leaed on the mantelpiece, looking
onee asked a friend of
                                                                                completely indifferent. Facing Talleyrand directly, Napoleon announced,
his who was his
companion in Cha-no­                                                            "For these ministers, teason has begun when they permit themselves to
yu, a tea merchant                                                              doubt." At the word "treason" the ruler expected his minister to be afad,
named Eiki, to tell hir
But Talleyrand only smiled, calm and bored.
frankly what was the
The sight of a subordinate apparently serene in the face of charges tat
public opinion about
hir. "Weil, " said Eiki,                                                        could get hir hanged pushed Napoleon to the edge. There were ministers,
"they say that you get                                                          he said, who wated hir dead, and he took a step doser to Talleyrand­
irritated with those who
who stared back at hir unfazed. Finally Napoleon exploded. "You are a
don 'I give their
coward," he screamed in Talleyrand's face, "a man of no faith. Nothing is
evidenee very clearly
and scold them, and so                                                          sacred to you. You would sell your own father. 1 have showered you wt
people are afraid to                                                            riches and yet there is nothing you would not do to hurt me." The oter
bring lawsuits before
ministers looked at each other in disbelief-they had never seen this fea­
you and if they do, the
less general, the conqueror of most of Europe, so unhinged.
truth does not come
out. "                                                                          "You deserve to be broken like glass," Napoleon continued, stamping,
"Ah, f ar glad you                                                              "I have the power to do it, but 1 have too muc contempt for you to bother.
have told me that, "
Why didn't 1 have you hanged from the gates of the Tuileries? But there is
replied Shigemune, "for
still tme for that." Yelling, almost out of breath, his face red, his eyes
now that f consider it, f
have fallen into the                                                            bulging, he went on, "You, by the way, are nothing but shit in a silk stoc­
habit of speaking                                                               ing. . , . What about your wife? You never told me that San Carlos was yOUf
sharply to people in
wife's lover?" "Indeed, sire, it did not occur to me that this informaton had
this way, and no doubl
any bearing on Your Majesty's glory or my own," said Talleyrand calmly,
humble folk and Ihose
who are not ready in                                                            completely unflustered. Mter a few more insults, Napoleon walked away.
speech get flurried and                                                         Talleyrand slowly crossed the room, moving with his caracteristc limp.
are unable to pul their
As an attendant helped hir with his doak, he tumed to his fellow ministers
case in the best light.
(all afraid they would never see hir again), and said, "What a pity, gentle­
f will see to it that this
does not oeeur in the                                                           men, that so great a man should have such bad manners."
future. " So after this he                                                      Despite his anger,                                                            not arest his foreign minister. He
had a tea mill plaeed
                                                                                merely relieved hir of his duties                                             banished hir from the court, believ­
before hir in courl and
                                                                                ing that for this man humiliation would be punishment enough, He did not
in front of it the paper­
covered shoji were                                                              realize that word had quickly spread of his trade-of how the emperor ha
drawn to, and Shige­                                                            completely lost control of hirself, and how Talleyrand had essentially hu­
mune sat behind them
                                                                                miliated hir by maintaining his composure and dignity. A page had been
and ground the tea and
thus kept his mind                                                              tumed: For te first time people had seen the great emperor lose his cool
calm while he heard                                                             under fire. A feeling spread that he was on the way down. As Talleyrad
the cases. And he could                                                         later said, "This is the beginning of the end."
326                                                                             LAW  3 9

Interpretation                                                                    easily see whelher his
composure was rufed
This was indeed the beginning of the end. Waterloo was stll six yeas
or nol by looking al lhe
aead, but Napoleon was on a slow descent to defeat, crystalizing in 1812
lea. which would nol
wt his disastrous invasion of Russia. Talleyrand was the first to see the         fall evenly ground 10
signs of his decline, especially in the irratonal war with Spain. Sometime in     Ihe proper consistency
if he got excited. And
1808, the minister decided that for the fture peace of Europe, Napoleon
so justice was done
ha to go. And so he conspired with Fouche.
impartially andpeople
It is possible that the conspiracy was never anything more than a                 wenl away from his
ploy-a device to push Napoleon over the edge. For it is hard to believe           courl satisfied.
CHA-NO-YU:
ta two of the most practca men in history would only go halfway in their
THE JAPANESE TEA
plottng. They may have been only strring the waters, trying to goad               CEREMONY
A. L. SADLER,
Napoleon into a misstep. And indeed, what they got was the tantm that
1 962
laid out his loss of control for al to see. In fact, Napoleon's soon-famous
blowup that afteroon had a profoundly negative effect on his public
iage.
This is the problem with the angry response. At first it may strike fear
ad terror, but only in some, and as the days pass and the storm clears,
oter  responses  emerge-embarrassment  and  uneasiness  about  the
1fpossible, no animos­
shouter's capacity for going out of control, ad resentent of what has
ity should be feit for
been said. Losing your temper, you always make unfair and exagerated
                                                                                  anyone                                                                     To speak
accusations. A few such trades ad people are countng the days until you           angrily to a person, to
ae gone.                                                                          show your hatred by
what you say or by the
In the face of a conspiracy against hir, a conspiracy beteen his two
way you look, is an
most important ministers, Napoleon certainly had a right to feel angry and
unnecessary proceed­
anxious. Eut by responding so angrily, and so publicly, he only demon­            ing-dangerous, fool­
stated his frustation. To    show your frustration is to show that you have       ish, ridiculous, and
vulgar.
lost your power to shape events; it is the helpless action of the child who re­
A nger or h alred should
sors to a hysterical fit to get his way. The powerfl never reveal this kind of
never be shown other­
weakness.                                                                         wise than in what you
There were a number of things Napoleon could have done in this situ­              do; andfeelings will be
all the more effective in
aton. He could have thought about the fact that two eminently sensible
action, in so far as you
men had had reason to tur against hir, and could have listened and
avoid the exhibition of
leaed fom them. He could have tried to                                            w                                                                          them back to hir. He could   them in any other way.
                                                                                  even have gotten rid of them, making their imprisonment or death an omi­   1t is only the cold­
blooded animals whose
nous display of his power. No tirades, no childish fits, no embarrassing
bite is poisonous.
aer-effects-just a quiet and definitive severing of tes.
ARTHUR
Remember: Tantums neither intimidate nor inspire loyalty. They                    SCHOPENHAUER,
1 788-1860
only create doubts ad uneasiness about your power. Exposing your weak­
ness, these stormy eruptons ofen herald a fall.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
By  the late 1920s, Haile Selassie had nearly achieved his goal of assuming
totl control over Ethiopia, a county he feIt needed strong and unified
leadership. A regent to the empress Zauditu (stepdaughter of the late
queen) and heir to the throne, Selas sie had spent several years weakening
the power of Ethiopia's various warlords. Now only one real obstacle stood
LAW 39                                                                            327

in his way: the empress and her husband, Ras Gugsa. Slassie knew the
royal couple hated hir ad wanted to get rid of hir, so to cut short their
THE \l()  KEY A  D
plotting  he  made  Gugsa  the  goveror  of  the  norther  province of
TlIE \\ASI'
Begemeder, forcing hir to leave the capital, where the empress lived.
A monkey, whilst
For several years Gugsa played the loyal administrator_ But Selassie
m unching a ripe pear,
was pestered by the                                                           did not trust hir: He knew that Gugsa and the empress were plottng re­
bare-faced importuni­                                                         venge_ As time passed and Gugsa made no move, the chances of a plot
ties ofa wasp, who,
only increased. Selassie knew what he had to do: draw Gugsa out, get
nolens volens, would
under his skin, and push hir into acton before he was ready.
have a part. After
threatening the monkey                                                        For several years, a norther tribe, the Azebu Gallas, had been in vir­
with his anger if he                                                          tual rebellion against the throne, robbing and pillaging local villages ad
further hesitated to
                                                                              refsing to pay taxes. Selassie had done nothing to stop them, lettng them
submit to his demand,
he settled on the fruit;                                                      grow stronger. Finally, in 1929, he ordered Ras Gugsa to lead an army
but was as soon                                                               against these  disobedient tribesmen.  Gugsa  agreed,  but inwardly he
knocked off by the                                                            seethed-he had no grudge against the Azebu Gallas, and the demand tat
monkey.
                                                                              he fight them hurt his pride. He could not disobey the order, but as he
The irritable wasp now
had recourse to invec­                                                        worked to put together an army, he began to spread an ugly rumor-tat
tive-and, ajier using                                                         Selas sie was in cahoots with the pope, and planned to convert the count
the most insulting
to Roman Catholicism and make it a colony of Itay_ Gugsa's army swelled,
language, which the
and some of the tribes from which its soldiers cae secretly agreed to fght
other calmly listened
to, he so worked                                                              Selassie. In March of 1930 a enormous force of 35,000 men began to
himself up into violent                                                       march, not on the Azebu Gallas but south, toward the capital of Addis
passion that, losing all
Ababa. Made confident by his growing stength, Gugsa now openly led a
consideration ofthe
holy war to depose Selas sie and put the country back in the hands of te
penalty, he flew to the
face of the monkey,                                                           Christians.
and stung him with                                                            He did not see the trap that had been laid for hir. Before Selassie had
such rage that he was
ordered Gugsa to fight the Azebu Gallas, he had secured the support of te
unable to extricate his
Ethiopian church. And before the revolt got underway, he had bribed sev­
weapon, and was
compelled to tear                                                             eral of Gugsa's key allies not to show up for battle. As the rebel           ay
himself away, leaving it                                                      marched south, arplanes flew overhead dropping leaflets announcing tat
in the wound-thus
the highest church officials had recognized Selassie as the tue Christa
entailing on himself a
leader of Ethiopia, and tat they had excommunicated Gugsa for foment­
lingering death, accom­
panied by pains much                                                          ing a civil war. These leaflets severely blunted the emotons behind te
greater than those he                                                         holy crusade. And as battle loomed and the support that Gugsa's allies had
had inflicted.
promised hir failed to show up, soldiers began to flee or defect.
FAHLES.
When the battle came, the rebel army quicy collapsed. Refsing to
JONATHAN BIRCH,
1 783-1847                                                                    surrender, Ras Gugsa was killed in the fighting. The empress, distraught
over her husband's death, died a few days later. On April 30, Selassie is­
sued a formal proclaration announcing his new title: Emperor of Ethiopia.
Interpretation
Haile Selassie always saw several moves ahead. He knew that if he let Ra
Gugsa decide the time and place of the revolt, the danger would be muc
greater than ifhe forced Gugsa to act on Selassie's terms. So he goaded hir
into rebellion by offending his manly pride, asking hir to fight people he
had no quarrel with on behalf of a man he hated. Thinking everything out
328                                                                           LAW  3 9

aead, Selassie made sure tat Gugsa's rebellion would come to nothing,
and that he could use it to do away with his last two enemies.
O ITC!{  HI(; I I  PRIEST
This is the essence of the Law: When the waters are stll, your oppo­
Kin'yo, an officer ofthe
nents have the tme and space to plot actions that they will initiate and con­
second rank, had a
tol. So str the waters, force the fish to the surface, get them to act before
brother called the High
tey ae ready, stea the initative. The best way to do this is to play on un­      Priest Ryogaku, an
contollable emotons-pride, vanity, love, hate. Once the water is stirred         extremely bad­
                                                                                 tempered man. Next to
up, the little fish cannot help but rise to the bait. The angrier they become,
                                                                                 his monastery grew a
te less contol they have, ad finally they ae caught in the whirlpool you         large nettle-tree which
have made, and they drown.                                                       occasioned the nick­
name peopte gave him,
the Nettle-tree High
A sovereig should never launch an army out 01 anger
Priest. " That name is
                                                                                                                                    a leader should never start a war out olwrath.                       outrageous," said the
                                                                                                                                    Sun-tzu, fourth century B. c.                                        high priest, and cut
                                                                                                                                                                                                         down the tree. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                         stump still being left,
                                                                                                                                                                                                         people referred to him
                                                                                 KEYS TO POWER                                                                                                           now as the Stump High
A                                                                                g                                                  people usually end up looking ridiculous, for their response seems   Priest. More furious
than ever, Ryogaku had
out of proportion to what occasioned it. They have taken tings too seri­
the stump dug up and
ously, exaggerating the hurt or insult that has been done to them. They are
thrown away, but this
so sensitve to slight that it becomes comical how much they take person­         teft a big ditch. People
aly. More comical stll is their belief that their outbursts signif power. The    now called him the
Ditch High Priest.
tth is the opposite: Petulance is not power, it is a sign of helplessness.
ESSAYS IN IDLENESS,
People may temporarily be cowed by your tantums, hut in the end they
KENKÖ,
lose respect for you. They also realize they can easily undermine a person       JAPAN,
FOURTEENTH CENTURY
wt so little self-contol.
The  aswer, however, is not to repress our angry or emotonal re­
sponses. For repression drains us of energy and pushes us into strange be­
havior. Instead we have to chage our perspectve: We   have to realize that
noting in the soda realm, ad in te game of power, is personal.
Everyone is caught up in a chan of events that long predates the pre­
sent moment.  Our ager ofen sters fom problems in our childhood,
fom the problems of our parents whic ster fom their own childhood, on
and on. Our ager aso has roots in the many interactons wit others, the
acumulated disappoint                                                            ents ad heartaches that we have suffered. An in­
dividual will ofen appear as the instgator of our ager but it is muc more
complicated, goes far beyond what tat individual did to uso If a person ex­
plodes with anger at you (and i seems out of proportion to what you did to
tem), you must remind yourself that it is not exclusively directed at you
do not be so vain. The cause is much larger, goes way back in tme, in­
volves  dozens  of prior hurts,  and  is  actually  not  wort  the  bother to
understad. Instead of seeing it as a persona grudge, look at the emotonal
outburst as a disguised power move, a atempt to contol or punish you
cloaked in the form of hurt feelings and anger.
This shift of perspectve will let you play the game of power with more
clarity ad energy. Instead of overreactng, ad becoming ensnared in peo-
LAW 3 9                                                                          329

ple's emotions, you will tur their loss of control to your advantage: You
keep your head while they are losing theirs.
During an importat batde in the War of the Three Kingdoms, in the
third century A.D., advisers to te commander Ts'ao Ts'ao discovered docu­
ments showing that certain of his generals had conspired with the enemy,
and urged hir to arrest and execute them. Instead he ordered the docu­
ments bumed and the matter forgotten. At this critical moment in the bat­
de, to get upset or demand justce would have reverberated against hir:
A angry acton would have called attenton to the generals' disloyalty,
which would have harmed the troops' morae. Justice could wait-he
would deal with the generals in time. Ts'ao Ts'ao kept his head and made
the right decision.
Compare this to Napoleon's response to Talleyrand: Instead of taking
the conspiracy personally, te emperor should have played the game like
Ts'ao Ts'ao, careflly weighing te consequences of any action he took.
The more powerfl response in the end would have been to ignore Tal­
leyrand, or to bring the minister gradually back to his side and punish him
later.
Anger only cuts off our options, and the powerful cannot trive with­
out options. Once you train yourself not to take matters personally, and to
contol your emotional responses, you will have placed yourself in a posi­
ton of tremendous power: Now you can play with the emotona responses
of other people. Str the insecure into action by impugning their manhood,
and by dangling the prospect of an easy victory before their faces. Do          a
Houdini did when challenged by the less successfl escape artist Kleppini:
Reveal an apparent weaness (Houdini let Kleppini steal the combinaton
for a pair of cuffs) to lure your opponent into acton. Then you can beat
hir with ease. With the arrogant too you can appear weaer tha you are,
tauntng them into a rash action.
Sun Pin, commander of the armies of Ch'i and loyal disciple of Sun­
tzu, once led his toops against the armies of Wei, which outnumbered hir
two to one. "Let us light a hundred thousand fires when our army enters
Wei," suggested Sun Pin, "fifty tousand on the next day, and only thirty
thousand on the third." On the third day the Wei general exclaimed, "I
knew the men of Ch'i were cowads, ad after only three days more tha
half of them have deserted!" S, leaving behind his slow-moving heavy in­
fanty, the general decided to seize the moment and move swifly on the
Ch'i camp with a lighdy armed force. Sun Pin's toops retreated, luring
Wei's army into a narrow pass, where they ambushed and destoyed tem.
With the Wei general dead and his forces decimated, Sun Pin now easily
defeated the rest of his amy.
In the face of a hot-headed enemy, finaly, an excellent response is no
response. Follow the Talleyrand tactc: Nothing is as infriating as a ma
who keeps his cool while others are losing teirs. If it will work to your ad­
vantage to unsettle people, affect the  aristocratic, bored pose, neiter
mocking nor triumphant but simply indifferent. This will light their fse.
330                                                                             LAW 39

Wen tey embarrass themselves with a temper tantrum, you will have
ganed several victories, one of these being tha in the face of their childish­
ness you have maintained your dignity ad composure.
Image: The Pond of Fish. The waters
are clear and calm, and the fish are weIl below the surface.
Stir the waters and they emerge. Stir i t  s o m e  more and they get
angry, rising to the surface, biting whatever comes near­
including a freshly baited hook.
Authority: If your opponent is of a hot temper, try to irritate hir. If he
is arrogant, try to encourage his egotism                                        One who is skilled at
making the enemy move does so by creating a situation according to
which the enemy will act; he entices te enemy with something he is
certain to tae. He keeps the enemy on the move by holding out bait
and then attacks hir with picked troops. (Sun-tzu, fourth century B.C.)
REVERSAL
Wen playing with people's emotions you have to be carefl. Study the
enemy beforehand: Some fish are best lef at the bottom of the pond.
The leaders of the city of Tyre, capital of ancient Phoenicia, feIt confi­
dent they could withstand Alexander the Great, who had conquered the
Orient but had not attacked their cit, which stood weIl protected on the
water. They sent ambassadors to Alexander saying that although they
would recognize hir as emperor they would not allow hir or his forces to
enter Tyre. This of course enraged hir, and he immediately mounted a
siege. For four months the city withstood hir, and finally he decided that
te struggle was not worth it, and that he would come to tenns with the
Tyrians. But they, feeling that they had already baited Alexander and got­
ten away with it, and confident that they could withstand hir, refsed to
LAW 3 9                                                                          331

negotiate                                                                        in fact tey killed his messengers.
This pushed Alexander over te edge. Now it did not matter to hm
how long the siege lasted or how large a army it needed; he had the re­
sources, and would do whatever it took. He remounted his asault so sten­
uously that he captured Tyre within days, bured it to the ground, and sold
its people into slavery.
You can bait te powerfl and get them to  commit and divide their
forces as Sun Pin did, but test the waters first. Find te gap in their stengt.
If there is no gap-if they are impossibly stong-you have noting to gan
and  everything to lose by provoking them. Choose caeflly whom you
bait, ad never str up the sharks.
Finaly there are times when a well-tmed burst of anger can do you
good, but your anger must be manufactured and under your control. Then
you ca determine exactly how and on whom it will fall. Never str up re­
actons that will work aganst you in the long                                     f                                    .  And use your thunder­
bolts rarely, to make them the more intmidating and meaningfl. Whether
purposefully staged or not, if your outbursts come too ofen, they                w                                    lose
their power.
332                                                                              LAW  3 9

LAW
40
D ESPISE THE
FREE LUNCH
JUDGMENT
Wat isodforjee is dangerous-it usually involves
either a trck or a hidden obligation. Wat has worth is
worth paying for By paying your own way you stay
clar of gratitude, guilt, and deceit. It i also oJten wise
to pay thefull prce-there is no cutting corers with ex­
cellence. Be lavish with your money and keep it cir­
culating, for genersity is a sign and a maget for
power.
333

MONEY AND POWER
In the re alm of power, everything must be judged by its cost, and every­
BI   B W i l  T H L I S I   In
thing has a price. What is offered for free or at bargain rates ofen comes
Many weak-minded
with a psychological price tag-complicated feelings of obligation, com­
pers{JIls in cities hope
promises with quality, the insecurity those compromises bring, on and on.
t discover properly
under the surface of the                                                      The powerfl lea                                                                 early to protect their most valuable resources: indepen­
eanh ami to make                                                                                                                                              dence and room to maneuver. By paying the fll price, they keep them­
some profit from il. In
selves free of dangerous entanglements and worries.
Ihe Maghrib there are
Being open and flexible with money also teaches the vaue of strategie
many Berber
"students " who are                                                           generosity, a variaton on the old tick of "giving when you are about to
Imahle to make a living
take." By giving the appropriate gif, you put the recipient under obliga­
by natural ways and
tion. Generosity sofens people up-to be deceived. By gaining a reputa­
means. They approach
tion for  liberality, you win people's admiration while distacting them fom
well-to-do people with
papers that have 10m                                                          your power plays. By stategically spreading your wealth, you charm te
margins and contain                                                           other courters, creating pleasure and making valuable allies.
either non-A rabic writ­
                                                                              Look at the masters of power-the Caesas, the Queen Elizabeths, the
ing or what they claim
to be the translation of                                                      Michelangelos, the Medicis: Not a miser among them. Even the great con
a document written by                                                         artsts spend feely to swindle. Tight purse strings are unattractive             when
the owner of buried
engaged in seduction, Casaova would give completely not only of himself
Ireasures, giving the
but of his walet. The powerfl understand that money is psycologically
clue to the hiding place.
In this way, they try to                                                      carged, and that it is also a vessei of politeness and sociability. They make
get their sustenance by                                                       the huma side of money a weapon in their armory.
[persuading the well­
For everyone able to play with money, thousands more are loced in a
lo-doJ to send them out
self-destructve refsal to  use money  creatvely  ad  stategically.  These
to dig and hunt for
treasure. Occasionally,                                                       types represent the opposite pole to the powerfl, and you must lea              to
one of these treasure                                                         recognize tem-either to  avoid their poisonous natures or  to  tur their in­
hunters displays
flexibility to your advantage :
strange information or
some remarkable trick
ofmagic with which he                                                         Te  Greedy Fish. The greedy fish take the human side out of money.
fools people into                                                             Cold and ruthless, they see  only the lifeless balance sheet; viewing others
believing his other
solely as either pawns or obstructons in their pursuit of weath, they tam­
claims, although,
ple on people's sentiments and  alienate valuable allies. No one wants to
in fact, he knows
nothing ofmagie and                                                           work with the greedy fish, and over the years they end up isolated, whic
its procedures                                                                ofen proves their undoing.
The things that have
Greedy fish are the con artist's bread ad butter: Lured by the bait of
been said about [trea­
easy money, they swallow the ruse hook, line, and sinker. They ae  easy to
sure huntingJ have no
scientific basis, nor are                                                     deceive, for  they spend so  much time dealing with numbers (not with peo­
they based upon                                                               pIe)  that they become blind  to  psychology,  including  their  own.  Either
[factualJ information.
avoid them before they exploit you or play on their greed to your gain.
It should be realized
that although treasures
are found, this happens                                                       Te Bargain Demon.  Powerfl people judge everything by what it costs,
rarely and by chance,                                                         not just in money but in time, dignity, and peace of mind. And this is ex­
not by systematic
actly what Bargan Demons canot do. Wasting valuable tme digging for
search                                                                        Those who
                                                                                                                                                              bargains, they worry endlessly about what they could have gotten else­
                                                                              are deluded or afflicted
                                                                              by these things must                                                            where for a little less. On top of that, the bargain item they do buy is ofen
                                                                              take refuge in God
                                                                                                                                                              shabby; perhaps it needs costly repairs, or will have to be replaced twice      a
334                                                                           LAW 40

fast  as  a high-quality  item.  The  costs  of these  pursuits-not  always  in   from their inability to
make a living and their
money (though the price of a bargan is ofen deceptve) but in tme and
laziness in this respect.
peace of mind-discourage normal people from undertaking them, but for
They should not
te Bargain Demon the bargain is an end in itself.                                 occupy themselves with
These types might seem to harm only themselves, but their attitudes               absurdities and untrue
stories.
are contagious: Unless you resist them they will infect you with the inse­
THE M U O A D D I M A H ,
eure feeling that you should have looked harder to find a cheaper price.
IBN KHALDÜN,
Don't argue with them or ty to chage them. Just mentally add up the               1332-1406
eost, in time and inner peace if not in hidden financial expense, of the irra­
tona pursuit of a bargain.
Te Sadist. Financial sadists play vicious power games with money as a
way of assertng their power. They might, for example, make you wait for
money that is owed you, promising you that the check is in the mail. Or if
MISER                                                                             TlE
tey hire you to work for them, they meddle in every aspect of the job,
A miser, to make sure
haggling and giving you ulcers. Sadists seem to think that paying for some­
of his property, sold all
ting gives them the right to torture and abuse the seIler. They have no           that he had and
sense of the courter element in money. If you are unlucky enough to get           converted it into a great
lump ofgold, which he
involved with this type, accepting a finacial loss may be better in the long
hid in a hole in the
run than getting entangled in their destructve power games.
ground, and went
continually to visit and
Te Indiscriminate Giver.  Generosity has a definite fnction i power:              inspect it. This roused
the curiosity of one of
It attracts people, sofens them up, makes allies out of them. But it has to be
his workmen, who,
used strategically, with a definite end in mind. Indiscriminate Givers, on
suspecting that there
te other hand, are generous because they wat to be loved and admired              was a treasure. when
by all. And their generosity is so indiscriminate and needy that it may not       his master's back was
turned, went to the
have the desired effect: If they give to one and all, why should the recipient
spot, and stole it away.
feel  specia? Attactive as it may seem to make a Indiscriminate Giver
When the miser
your mark, in any involvement with this type you will ofen feel burdened          retured and found the
place empty, he wept
by their insatiable emotonal needs.
and tore his hair But a
neighbor who saw him
in this extravagant
TRANSGRESSIONS OF THE LAW                                                         griej and learned the
cause ofit, said: "Fret
thyselfno longer, but
Transgression I
take a stone and put it
Mter Francisco Pizaro conquered Peru, in 1532, gold from the Incan Em­            in the sameplace, and
pire began to pour into Spain, and Spaniards of all classes started dreaming      think that it is your
lump of gold; for, as
of the instant riches to be had in the New World. The story soon spread of
you never meant to use
a                                                                                 Indian chief to the east of Peru who once each year would ritually cover
it, the one will do you
himself in gold dust and dive into a lake. Soon word ofmouth tasformed            as much good as the
EI Dorado, the "Golden Man," into an empire called EI Dorado, wealthier           other. "
The worth of money is
tan the Incan, where the streets were paved and the buildings inlaid with
not in its possession,
gold.  This elaboraton of the story did not seem implausible, for surely a
but in its use.
cief who could afford to waste gold dust in a lae must rule a golden em­
FABLES,
pire. Soon Spaiards were searching for EI Dorado all over northem South           AESOP,
                                                                                  SIXTH CENTURY B.e.
America.
                                                                                  LAW 40                                                                     335

In February of 1541, the largest expedition yet in this venture, led by
Pizarro's brother Gonzalo, lef Quito, in Ecuador. Resplendent in their ar­
There is a popular
mors and colorfl silks, 340 Spaniards headed east, along with 4,000 Indi­
saying in Japan that
goes "Tada yori takai                                                         ans to carry supplies and serve as scouts, 4,000 swine, dozens of llaas,
mono wa nai," mean­                                                           ad elose to 1,000 dogs. Eut the expedition was soon hit by torrential rain,
ing: "Nothing is more
which rotted its gear and spoiled its food. Meawhile, as Gonzalo Pizarro
costly than something
questioned the Indians they met aong the way, those who seemed to be
given free of charge. "
THE UNSPOKEN WAY,                                                             withholding information, or who had not even head of the fabulous king­
MICHIHIRO                                                                     dom, he would torture and feed to the dogs. Word of the Spaniards' mur­
MATSUMOTO,
1 988                                                                         derousness spread quickly among the Indias, who realized that the only
way to avoid Gonzalo's wrath was to make up stories about EI Dorado
and send hir as far away as possible. As Gonzalo and his men followed
the leads the Indians gave them, then, they were only led farther into deep
jungle.
The explorers' spirits sagged. Their uniforms had long since shredded;
their armor rusted and they threw it away; their shoes were tom to pieces,
MONEY
forcing them to walk barefoot; the Indian slaves they had set out with had
Yusuf Ibn Jafar el-
either died or deserted them; they had eaten not only the swine but the
Amudi used to take
hunting dogs and llamas. They lived on roots and fuit. Reaizing that they
sums ofmoney, some­
times very large ones,                                                        could not continue this way, Pizarro decided to risk river travel, and a
from those who came                                                           barge was built out of rotting wood. Eut the jourey down the treacherous
to study wirh him.
Napo River proved no easier. Setting up camp on the river's edge, Gonzalo
A distinguished legalist
sent scouts ahead on the barge to find India settlements with food. He
visiting him once said:
"1 am enchanted and                                                           waited and waited for the scouts to retur, only to find out they had de­
impressed by your                                                             cided to desert the expediton and continue down the river on their own.
teachings, and I am
The rain contnued without end. Gonzalo's men forgot about EI Do­
sure that you are
rado; they wated only to retur to Quito. Finally, in August of 1542, a lit­
directing your disciples
in a proper manner.                                                           tle over a hundred men, from an expedition originally numbering in the
But it is not in accor­                                                       thousands, managed to find their way back. To   the residents of Quito they
dance with tradition to
                                                                              seemed to have emerged from hell itself, wrapped in tatters ad skins, their
take money for knowl­
edge. Besides, the                                                            bodies covered in sores, and so emaciated as to be unrecognizable. For
action is open to misin­                                                      over a year and a half they had marched in an enormous cirele, two thou­
terpretation. "                                                               sand miles by foot. The vast sums of money invested in the expedition had
El-Amudi said: "1 have
yielded nothing-no sign of EI Dorado and no sign of gold.
never sold any knowl-
edge. There is no                                                             Interpretation
money on earth suffi­                                                         Even after Gonzalo Pizarro's disaster, the Spaniards launched expediton
cient to pay for it. As
after expediton in search of EI Dorado. And like Pizarro the conquistadors
for misinterpretation,
would bum ad loot villages, torture Indians, endure unimaginable hard­
the abstaining from
ships, and get no eloser to gold. The money they spent on such expeditions
taking money will not
prevent it, for it will                                                       cannot be calculated; yet despite the ftility of the search, the lure of the
find some other object.
fatasy endured.
Rather should you
Not only did the search for EI Dorado cost millions of lives-both In­
know that a man who
takes money may be                                                            dian and Spanish-it helped bring the ruin of the Spanish empire. Gold be­
greedy for money, or                                                          came Spain's obsession. The gold that did find its way back to Spain-and
he may not. But a man
a lot did-was reinvested in more expeditions, or in the purehase of luxu­
who takes nothing at
ries, rather than in agriculture or any other productive endeavor. Whole
all is under the gravest
Spanish towns were depopulated as their menfolk lef to hunt gold. Farms
336                                                                           LAW 40

fell into ruin, and the army had no recruits for its European wars. By the        suspicion of robbing
the disciple of his soul.
end of the seventeenth century, the entire country had shrunk by more
People who say, 'I take
tan half of its population; the city of Madrid had gone fom a populaton
nothing, ' may be found
of 400,000 to 150,000. With diminishing returs from its efforts over so           to take away the vo/i­
many years, Spain fell into a decline fom which it never recovered.               tion oftheir victim. "
THE D E R M IS PROBE,
Power requires self-discipline. The prospect of wealth, particularly
IDRIES SHAH,
easy, sudden wealth, plays havoc with the emotions. The suddenly rich be­         1 970
lieve that more is always possible. The free lunc, the money that will fall
into your lap, is just around the corer.
In this delusion the greedy neglect everything power really depends
on: self-contol, the goodwill of others, and so on. Understand: With one
exception-death-no lastng change in fortune comes quicly. Sudden
wealth rarely lasts, for it is built on nothing solid. Never let lust for money
TIIE  IA[                                                                         \                            w
lure you out of the protective and enduring fortress of real power. Make
LOVED \!O'EY IETTEH
power your goal and money will find its way to you. Leave EI Dorado for           THA" L1n:
suckers and fools.
In ancient times there
was an old woodcutter
Transgression 1 1                                                                 who went to the moun­
tain almost every day
In the early eighteenth century, no one stood higher in English society
to cut wood.
ta the Duke ad Duchess of Marlborough. The duke, having led suc­
It was said that this old
cessfl campaigns against the French, was considered Europe's premier              man was a miser who
general and strategist. And his wife, the duchess, after much maeuvering,         hoarded his silver until
it changed to gold, and
had established herself as the favorite of Queen Anne, who became ruler
that he ca red more for
of England in 1702. In 1704 the duke's triumph at the Battle of Blenheim          gold than anything else
made hir the toast of England, and to honor hir the queen awarded hir             in all the world.
One day a wilderness
a lage plot of land in the town of Woodstock, and the fnds to create a
tiger sprang at him and
geat palace there. Calling his planned hore the Paace of Blenheim, the
though he ran he could
duke chose as his architect the young John Vanbrugh, a kind of Renais­
not escape, and the
sace man who wrote plays as weIl as designed buildings. And so con­               tiger carried him off in
its mouth.
stcton bega, in the summer of 1705, with much fanfare and great
The woodcutter's son
hopes.
saw his father's danger,
Vanbrugh had a dramatist's sense of architecture. His palace was to be            and ran to save him il
a monument to Marlborough's brilliance ad power, ad was to include                possible. He carried a
long knife, and as he
aficial lakes, enormous bridges, elaborate gardens, and other fantastcal
could run faster than
touches. From day one, however, the ducess could not be pleased: She
the tiger, who had a
tought Vanbrugh was wastng money on yet another stand of trees; she               man to carry, he .\Oon
wated the palace finished as soon as possible. The duchess tortured Van­          overlOok them.
His father was not
brgh and his workmen on every detail. She was consumed with pett
much hurt, for the tiger
maUers; although the goverment was paying for Blenheim, she counted
held him by his clothes.
every penny. Eventually her grumbling, aout Blenheim and other things             When the old woodclIt­
too, created an irreparable rif between her and Queen Anne, who, i 171 1,         ter saw his son abolt to
stab the tiger he called
dismissed her from the court, ordering her to vacate her apatments at the
Olt in great alarm:
royal palace. When the duchess lef (fming over the loss of her position,
"Do not spoil the
ad also of her royal salary), she empted the apartment of every fixture           tiger's skin! Do not
down to the brass doorknobs.                                                      5poil the tiger\' skin! II
you can kill him with­
Over the next ten years, work on Blenheim would stop and start, as
Olt clfting holes in his
te fnds becae harder to procure fom the goverment. The ducess
LAW 40                                                                            337

skin we can get man y                                                            thought Vanbrugh was out to ruin her. She quibbled over every carload of
pieces ofsilver je)r it.
stone and bushel of lime, counted every exta yard of iron railing or foot of
Ki hir, but da not cut
wainscot, hurling abuse at the wastefl workmen, contactors, and survey­
his body. "
While the son was                                                                ors. Marlborough, old and weary, wanted nothing more than to settle into
listening to his father's                                                        the  palace  in his  last yeas,  but  the project became bogged  down  in a
instructions the tiger
swamp of litigation, the workmen suing the duchess for wages, the duchess
suddenly dashed off
suing the architect right back. In the midst of this interminable wrangling,
into the forest, carrying
the old man where the                                                            the duke died. He had never spent a night in his beloved Blenheim.
son could not reach                                                              After Marlborough's death, it beca                                               e clear that he had a vast estate,
hir, and he was soon
worth over .2 million-more than enough to pay for fishing the palace.
killed.
But the duchess would not relent: She held bac Vanbrug's wages as weIl
"CIlINFSE fAHLE,"
VARIOI)S FAULES                                                                  as the workmen's, and finaly had the achitect dismissed. The man who
FROM VARIOI)S PLACES,
took his place finished Blenheim in a few years, following Vanbrugh's de­
DIANE DI PRIMA, ED.,
1 960                                                                            signs to the letter. Vanbrugh died in 1726, locked out of the palace by the
duchess, unable to set foot in his greatest creaton. Foreshadowing the ro­
mantic  movement, Blenheim had started a whole new tend in arcitec­
ture, but had given its creator a twenty-year nightmare.
Interpretation
For the Duchess of Marlborough, money was a way to play sadistic power
games. She saw the loss of money as a symbolic loss of power. With Va­
'11 1 1':  S'IOIlY  OF                                                           \1 0SI:S
-\'  I ' I I A H A ( > l 1                                                                                                                                        brugh her contortions went deeper stll: He was a great artist, and she en­
                                                                                                                                                                  vied his power to create, to attain a fa                                        e outside her reach. She may not
It is wrirten in the
historie.l' ofthe                                                                                                                                                 have had his gifs, but she did have the money to torture and abuse hir
prophe!s that Moses                                                                                                                                               over the pettiest detals-to ruin his life.
was sent to Pharaoh
This kind of sadism, however, beas an awfl price. It made construc­
wirh many miracles,
tion that should have lasted ten years take tenty. It poisoned may a rela­
wonders and honors,
Now the daily ration                                                             tionship,  alienated the duchess fom  the  court,  deeply paned the  duke
for Pharaoh ,- tahle was                                                         (who wanted only to live peaceflly in Blenheim), created endless lawsuits,
4,000 sheep, 400 co ws,
ad took years off Vanbrugh's life . Finally, too, posterity had the last word:
200 camels. anti a
Vanbrugh is recognized as a genius while the duchess is forever remem­
corresponding amoun!
oI chickens, fish. hever-                                                        bered for her consummate cheapness.
ages, fried meats,                                                               The powerfl must have gradeur of spirit-they ca never reveal any
sweets, ant other
pettiness. And money is  the most visible aena in whic to display either
things. All (he people of
grandeur or pettiness. Best spend freely, then, and create a reputation for
Egyp( and all his army
used to eat a! his table                                                         generosity, which in  the end will pay great dividends. Never let financia
every day. For 40(                                                               details blind you to the bigger picture of how people perceive you. Their
years he had claimed
                                                                                 resentment will cost you in the long run. And if you want to meddle in the
divinity arul never
ceased providing this                                                            work  of  creative  people  under your  hire,  at  least pay them  weIl.  Your
food.                                                                            money will buy their submission better than your displays of power.
When Moses prayed,
saying, "0 Lord,
destroy Pharaoh, " God
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
answered his prayer
arul said. "I shall
destroy hir in water.
Observance I
and I shall bestow al!
Pietro Aretino, son of a lowly shoemaker, had catapulted hirself into fa         e
his wealth and that of
                                                                                 his soldiers on you ami                                                          as a writer of bitng satires. But like every Renaissance artist, he needed to
                                                                                 your peoples. " Several                                                          find a patron who would give hir a comfortable lifestyle while not inter-
338                                                                              LAW 4 0

fering with his work. In 1528 Aretno decided to attempt a new strategy in        years passed hy after
this promise, and
te patronage game. Leaving Rome, he established hirself in Venice,
Pharaoh, doomed to
where few had heard of hir. He had a fair amount of money he had man­
ruin, continued to live
aged to save, but little else. Soon after he moved into his new hore, how­       in all his magnificence.
ever,  he threw open its  doors  to  rich  and  poor,  regaling them with        Moses was impatient
for God to destroy
banquets and amusements. He befiended each and every gondolier, tp­
Pharaoh quickly, and
ping them royally. In the streets, he spread his money liberally, giving it
he could not endure to
away to beggars, orphans, washerwomen. Among the city's commoners,               wait any langer. So he
word quickly spread that Aretno was more tha just a great writer, he was         fasted for forty days
and went to Mount
a man of power-a kind of lord.
Sinai, and in his
Artists and men of influence soon began to frequent Aretino's house.
communing with god
Within a few years he made hirself a celebrity; no visiting dignitary would      he said, "0 Lord, Thou
tink of leaving Venice without paying hir a call. His generosity had cost        didst promise that
                                                                                 Thou wouldst destroy
hir most of his savings, but had bought hir influence and a good name­
                                                                                 Pharaoh, and still he
a corerstone in the foundaton of power. Since in Renaissance Italy as            has forsaken none of
elsewhere the ability to spend freely was the privilege of the rich, the aris­   his blasphemies and
tocracy thought Aretno had to be a man of influence, since he spent              pretensions. So when
                                                                                 wilt Thou destroy
money like one. And since the influence of a man of influence is worth
                                                                                 hir ? "
buying, Aretino became the recipient of all sorts of gifts and moneys.           A voice came from The
Dukes and duchesses, wealthy mercants, and popes and princes com­                Truth saying, "0
Moses, you want Me to
peted to gain his favor, and showered hir with all kinds of presents.
destroy Pharaoh as
Aretno's spending habits, of course, were strategie, and the strategy
quickly as possihle, but
worked like a charm. But for real money and comfort he needed a great            a thousand times a
patron's bottomless pockets. Having surveyed the possibilities, he eventu­       thousand of My
servants want Me never
aly set his sights on the extremely wealthy Marquis of Mantua, and wrote
to do so, because they
an epic poem that he dedicated to the marquis. This was a common prac­
partake of his bounty
tice of writers looking for patronage: In exchange for a dedication they         and enjoy tranquillity
would get a small stipend, enough to write yet aother poem, so that they         under his rule. Sy My
power I swear that as
spent their lives in a kind of constant servilit. Aretino, however, wanted
lang as he provides
power, not a measly wage. He might dedicate a poem to the marquis, but
abundant food and
he would offer it to hir as a gift, implying by doing so that he was not a       comfort for My erea-
hired hack looking for a stpend but that he and the marquis were equals.         tures, I shall not
destroy hir. "
Aretino's gif-giving did not stop there: As a elose fiend of two of
Moses said, " Then
Venice's greatest artists, the sculptor Jacopo Sansovino and the painter
when will Thy promise
Titian, he convinced tese men to pacipate in his gif-giving sceme.               be fulfilled?" God said,
Aretno had studied the marquis before going to work on hir, ad knew              "My promise will be
fulfilled when he with ­
his taste inside and out; he was able to advise Sansovino and Titan what
holds his provision
subject matter would please the marquis most. When he then sent a Sanso­
from My creatures. If
vino sculpture and a Titian painting to the marquis as gifts from al three of    ever he begins to  lessen
tem, the man was beside hirself with joy.                                        his bounty, know that
his hour is drawing
Over te next few months, Aretino sent other gifts-swords, saddles,
near.
the glass that was a Venetian specialty, things he knew the marquis prized.
It chanced that one day
Soon he, Titian, and Sansovino bega to receive gifts fom the marquis in          Pharaoh said to
Haman, "Moses has
retur. And the strategy went frther: When the son-in-Iaw of a friend of
gathered the Sons of
Aretno's found hirself in jail in Matua, Aretino was able to get the mar­
Israel about hir and is
quis to arrange his release. Aretino's friend, a wealthy merchant, was a
causing us disquiet. We
man of great influence in Venice; by turing the goodwill he had built up         know not what will he
                                                                                 LAW 40                      339

the issue ofhis affair                                                         with the marquis to use, Aretino had now bought this ma's indebtedness,
with uso We must keep
too, and he i tur would help Aretino when he could. The circle of influ­
our stores full iest at
ence was growing wider. Time and again, Aretino was able to cash in on
any time we be without
resources. So we must                                                          the immense political power of the marquis, who also helped him in his
halve our daily rations                                                        may court romaces.
and keep the saving in
Eventualy,  however,  the  relationship  became  stained,  as  Aretno
reserve. " He deducted
came to feel that the marquis should have requited his generosity better.
2,000 sheep, 200 cows,
and a 100 camels, and                                                          But he would not lower hirself to begging or whining: Since the excange
similarly every two or
of gifs between the two men had made them equals, it would not seem
three days reduced the
right to bring up money. He simply withdrew fom the marquis's circle and
ration. Moses then
knew that the promise                                                          hunted for other wealthy prey,  settling first on the French king Francis,
ofThe Truth was near                                                           then the Medicis, the Duke of Urbino, Emperor Charles V, and more. In
to fulfillment, for exces­                                                     the end, having many patrons  meat he did not have to bow to ay of
sive economy is a sign
them, ad his power seemed comparable to that of a great lord.
of decline and a bad
omen. The masters of                                                           Interpretation
tradition say that on                                                          Aretno understood two fundamental propertes of money: First, that it has
the day when Pharaoh
to circulate to bring power. What money should buy is not lifeless objects
was drowned only two
but power over people. By keeping money in constant circulaton, Aretino
ewes had been killed in
                                                                               his küchen.                                                                       bought an  ever-expanding circle of influence that in the  end more tha
Nothing is better than                                                                                                                                           compensated hir for his expenses.
generosity                                                                     1f a man
Second, Aretno understood the key property of the gift. To  give a gift
is rich and desires,
is to imply that you and the recipient are equals at the very least, or that
without a royal charter,
to act like a lord; if he                                                      you  are  the  recipient's superior. A gif also involves an indebtedness or
wants men to humble                                                            obligation; when  friends, for instance, offer  you  something for fee, you
themselves before him,
can be  sure they  expect something in retur, and that to get it they are
to revere him and call
making you feel  indebted. (The mechaism may or may not  be  entirely
him lord and prince,
then tell him every day                                                        conscious on their part, but this is how it works.)
to spread a table with                                                         Aretno avoided such encumbraces on his freedom. Instead of acting
victuals. All those who
like a menial who expects the powerfl to pay his way in life, he tured the
have acquired renown
whole  dynamic  around; instead of being  indebted  to  the  powerfl,  he
in the world, have
gained it mainly                                                               made the powerfl indebted to hir. This was the point of his gift-giving, a
through hospitality,                                                           ladder that carried hir to the highest social levels. By the end of his life he
while the miserly and
had become the most famous writer in Europe.
avaricious are despised
Understand: Money may determine power relatonships, but those re­
in both worlds.
THE BOOK OF                                                                    latonships need not depend on the amount of money you have; they also
GOVERNMENT OR                                                                  depend on the way you use it. Powerfl people give feely, buying influ­
RULES FOR KINGS,
NIZAM AL-MuLK,                                                                 ence rather than things. If you accept the  inferior position because you
ELEVENTH CENTURY                                                               have no fortune yet, you may find yourself in it forever. Play the trick that
Aretno played on Italy's aristocracy: Imagine yourself an equal. Play the
lord, give freely, open your doors, circulate your money, ad create the fa­
cade of power through a achemy that tansforms money into influence.
Observance II
Soon afer Baron James Rothschild made his fortune i Paris in the ealy
1820s, he faced his most intactable problem: How could aJew and a Ger­
man, a total outsider to French society, win the respect of the xenophobie
French upper classes? Rothschild was a man who understood power-he
340                                                                            LAW 4 0

kew that his fortune would bring hir status, but tat if he remained so­
cially alienated neither his status nor his fortune would last. S he looked at
THE FLAME-COLOREIl
te society of the tme and asked what would                                       w                          their hearts.
CLOAK
Charit? The French couldn't cae less. Politcal influence? He already
During the campaign
had that, ad if anything it only made people more suspicious of hir. The
of Cambyses in Egypt,
one weak spot, he decided, was boredom. In the period of the restoration         a great many Creeks
of the monarchy, the French upper classes were bored. So Rothschild              visited that country for
one reason or another:
bega to spend astounding sums of money on entertaining them. He hired
same, as was to be
the best architects in France to design his gadens and ballroom; he hired
expected, for trade,
Marie-Antoine Careme, the most celebrated French chef, to prepare the            same to serve in the
most lavish parties Paris had ever witessed; no Frenchman could resist,          army, others, no doubt,
out ofmere curiosity, to
even if the parties were given by a German Jew. Rothschild's weekly
see what they could see.
soirees began to attract bigger and bigger numbers. Over the next few
Amongst the sightseers
yeas he won the only thing that would seeure an outsider's power: social         was A eaces 's san Sylo­
aceptance.                                                                       san, the exiled brother
                                                                                 of Polycrates of Samos.
Interpretation
                                                                                 While he was in Egypt,
Stategie generosity is always a great weapon in building a support base,         Syloson had an extra­
parcularly for the outsider. But the Baron de Rothschild was cleverer still:     ordinary strake of luck:
he was hanging about
He kew it was his money that had created the barier between hir and
the streets of Memphis
te French, making hir look ugly and untustworthy. The best way to
dressed in a flame­
overcome this was literally to waste huge sums, a gesture to show he valued      colored cloak, when
French cultre ad society over money. What Rothschild did resembled               Darius, who at that
time was a member of
te faous potlatch feasts of the American Northwest: By periodically de­
Cambyses's guard and
stoying its wealth in a giant orgy of festvals and bonfires, an Indian tibe
not yet ofany particu­
would symbolize its power over other tibes. The base of its power was not        lar importance,
money but its ability to spend, and its confidence in a superiority that         happened to catch
sight of him and, seized
would restore to it all that the potlatch had destoyed.
with a sudden longing
In the end, the baron's soirees reflected his desire to mingle not just in
to possess the cloak,
Frace's business world but in its society. By wastng money on his pot­           came up to Syloson
Iatches, he hoped to demonstrate that his power went beyond money into           and made him an offer
for it.
te more precious realm of culture. Rothschild may have won social accep­
His extreme anxiety to
tnce by spending money, but the support base he gained was one that
get it was obvious
money alone could not buy. To   secure his fortune he had to "waste" it. That    enough to Syloson,
is strategie generosity in a nutshell-the ability to be flexible with your       who was inspired to
say: "1 am not selling
wealth, puttng it to work, not to buy objects, but to                            w                          people's hearts.
this for any money, but
if you must have it, 1
Observance III                                                                   will give it to you for
The Medicis of Renaissance Forence had built their immense power on              free. " Darius thereupon
thanked him warmly
te fortune they had made in baking. But in Florence, centuries-old re­
and took it. Syloson at
public that it was, the idea that money bought power went against all the
the moment merely
city's proud democratc values. Cosimo de' Medici, the first of the family to     thought he had lost it
gn great fame, worked around this by keeping a low profile. He never             by his foolish good
nature; then came the
flaunted his wealth. But by the tme his gradson Lorenzo cae of age, in
death of Cambyses and
te 1470s, the family's wealth was too large, and their influence too notce­
the revolt of the seven
able, to be disguised any longer.                                                against the Magus, and
Darius ascended the
Lorenzo solved the problem in his own way by developing the stat­
throne. Syloson now
eg of distacton that has served people of wealth ever since: He becae
LAW 40                                                                           341

had the news that the                                                         the most illustrious paton ofthe ats that history has ever known. Not only
man whose request for
did he spend lavishly on paintngs, he ereated Italy's finest apprentee
the jame-colored cloak
sehools for young artsts. It was in one of these scools that the young
he had formerly grati-
fied in Egypt had                                                             Miehelangelo first eaught the attenton of Lorenzo, who invited the artist to
become king of Persia.                                                        eome and live in his house. He did the same with Leonardo da Vinei. Onee
He hurried to Susa, sat
                                                                              under his wing, Michelangelo and Leonardo requited his generosity by be­
down at the entrance of
the royal palace, and                                                         eoming loyal artsts in his stable.
claimed to be included                                                        Whenever Lorenzo faeed an enemy, he would wield the weapon of
in the official list of the                                                   patronage. When Pisa, F1orenee's traditional enemy, threatened to rebel
king's benefactors. The
against it in 147, Lorenzo plaeated its people by pouring money into its
sentry on guard
university, whieh had onee been its pride and joy but had long ago lost its
reported his claim to
Darius, who asked in                                                          luster. The Pisans had no defense against this insidious maneuver, whic si­
surprise who the man
multaneously fed their love of culture ad blunted their desire for battle.
might be. "For surely, "
Interpretation
he said, "as I have so
recently come to the                                                          Lorenzo undoubtedly loved the arts, but his patonage of atsts had a prae­
throne, there cannot be                                                       tieal fnetion as weH, of whieh he was keenly aware. In F10renee at the
any Greek to whom I
time, banking was perhaps the least admired way of maing money, and
am indebted for a
was eertainly not a respected souree of power. The arts were at the other
service. Hardly any of
them have been here                                                           pole, the pole of quasi-religious transeendenee. By spending on the              a,
yet, and J certainly                                                          Lorenzo diluted people's opinions of the ugly souree of his weath, disguis­
cannot remember
ing hirself in nobility. There is no better use of stategie generosity tha
owing anything to a
that of distraeting attention fom an unsavory reality and wrapping oneself
Greek. But bring hir
in all the same, that J                                                       in the mantle of art or religion.
may know what he
means by this claim. "
Observance IV
The guard escorted
Louis XIV had a eagle eye for the strategie power of money. When he
Syloson into the royal
presence, and when the                                                        eame to the throne, the powerfl nobility had reeently proven a thor in
interpreters asked hir                                                        the monarehy's side, and seethed with rebeHiousness. S he impoverished
who he was and what
these aristoerats by making them spend enormous sums on maintaining
he had done to justify
their position in the eourt. Maing them dependent on royal largesse for
the statement that he
was the king \· benefac-                                                      their livelihood, he had them in his claws.
tor, he reminded                                                              Next Louis brought the nobles to their knees with stategie generosity.
Darills of the story of
It would work like this: Whenever he notieed a stubbor eourter whose in­
the cloak, and said that
fluenee he needed to gain, or whose troublemaking he needed to squelc,
he was the man who
had given it hir.                                                             he would use his vast wealth to sofen the soil. First he would ignore his vie­
"Sir, " exclaimed                                                             tim, making the man axious. Then the man would suddenly find that his
Darius, "you are the
son had been given a weH-paid post, or that fnds had been spent liberally
most generous of men;
in his hore region, or that he had been given a paintng he had long cov­
for while J was still a
person of no power or                                                         eted. Pesents would flow fom Louis's hads. Finally, weeks or months
consequence you gave                                                          later, Louis would ask for the favor he had needed all along. A man who
me a present-small
had onee vowed to do anything to stop the king would find he had lost the
indeed, but deserving
desire to fight. A straightorward bribe would have made him rebeHious;
then as much gratitude
from me as would the                                                          this was far more insidious. Facing hardened earth in whieh nothing eould
most splendid ofgifts
take root, Louis loosened the soil before he planted his seeds.
today. J will give you in
Interpretation
return more si/ver and
Louis understood that there is a deep-rooted emotional element in our atti­
gold than you can
                                                                              count, that you may                                                              tude to money, an element going baek to ehildhood. When we ae ehil-
342                                                                           LAW 4 0

dren, all kinds of complicated feelings about oUf parents center around          never regret that yuu
unce did a favur to
gfts; we see the giving of a gif as a sign of love and approval. And that
Darius the son of
emotional element never goes away. The recipients of gifs, financial or
Hystaspes. " "My lord, "
oterwise, are suddenly as vulnerable as children, especially when the gif        replied Syloson, "do
comes from someone in authority. They cannot help opening up; their will         not give me gold or
silver, but recover
is loosened, as Louis loosened the soil.
Samos fur me, my
To   succeed best, the gift should come out of the blue. It should be re­
native island, which
markable for the fact that a gft like it has never been given before, or for     now since Oroetes
being preceded by a cold shoulder fom the giver. The more ofen you give          killed my brother Poly­
                                                                                 crates is in the hands
to particular people, the blunter this weapon becomes. If they don't take
                                                                                 ofone of our servants.
your gifts for granted, becoming monsters of ingratitude, they will resent       Let Samos be your gift
what appears to be charity. The sudden, unexpected, one-time gf will not         to me-but let no man
spoil YOUf children; it will keep them under YOUf thumb.                         in the island be killed
or enslaved. "
Darius consented to
Observance V
Syloson 's  request, and
The antique dealer Fushimiya, who lived in the city of Edo (former name          dispatched a force
under the command
for Tokyo) in the seventeenth century, once made a stop at a village tea­
of Otanes, one ofthe
house. Aer enjoying a cup of tea, he spent several minutes scrutinizing the
seven, with orders to do
cup, which he eventually paid for ad took away with hir. A local artisan,        everything that Syloson
watehing this, waited until Fushimiya left the shop, then approached the old     had asked.
woman who owned the teahouse ad asked her who this man was. She told             THE HISTORIES,
HERODOTUS,
hir it was Japan's most famous connoisseur, antque dealer to the lord of
FIFTH CENTURY B.C.
Izumo. The atisan ra out of the shop, caught up with Fushimiya, and
begged hir to seIl hir the cup, which must clearly be valuable if Fushimiya
judged it so. Fushimiya laughed heartily: "It's just an ordinary cup of Bizen
ware," he explained, "and it is not valuable at all. The reason I was looking
at it was that the steam seemed to hang about it stragely and I wondered if
tere wasn't a leak somewhere." (Devotees of the Tea Ceremony were in­
Money is never spent to
terested in any odd or accidental beauty in nature.) Since the artisan stll
so much advantage as
seemed so excited about it, Fushirya gave hir the cup for free.
when you have been
The artisa took the cup around, trying to fd an expert who would                 cheated out ofit;for at
one stroke you have
appraise it at a high price, but since all of them recognized it as an ordinay
purchased prudence.
teacup he got nowhere. Soon he was neglectng his own business, thinking
ARTHUR
only of the cup ad the fortune it could bring. Finally he went to Eo to
SCHOPENHAUER,
tlk to Fushimiya at his shop. There the dealer, reaizing that he had inad­       1788-1860
vertently caused this man pain by making hir believe the cup had great
worth, pad hir 100 ryo (gold pieces) for the cup as a kindness. The cup
was indeed mediocre, but he wanted to rid the artisa of his obsession,
while also allowing hir to feel that his effort had not been wasted. The ar­
tsan thanked hir ad went on his way.
Soon word spread of Fushimiya's pUfchase of the teacup. Every dealer
i Japan clamored for hir to seIl it, since a cup he had bought for 100 ryo
must be wort muc more. He tried to explain the circumstances in which
he   had bought the cup, but the dealers could not be dissuaded. Fushimiya
finally relented and put the cup up for sale.
During the aucton, two buyers simultaneously bid 200 ryo for the
teacup, and then began to fight over who had bid first. Their fighting
LAW 40                                                                           343

tipped over a table a d  the teacup fell to the ground and broke into several
pieces. The auction was  clearly over. Fushimiya glued and  mended the
A L I FT OF FISI I
cup, then stored it away, tinking te aa fished. Years later, however,
Kung-yi Hsiu, premier
the great tea master Matsudaira Fumai visited the store, and asked to see
of Lu, was fond offish.
te cup, which by then had become legendary. Fumai examined it. "As a
Therefore, people in
the whole country                                                               piece," he said, "it is not up to much, but a Tea Master prizes sentment and
consäentiously bought                                                           associaton more than intrinsic value." He bought te cup for a high sumo
fish, which they
A glued-togeter work of less than ordinay crasmanship had become
presented to him.
one of the most famous objects in Japan.
However, Kung-yi
would not accept the                                                            Interpretaton
presents. Against such a                                                        The story shows, first, an essenta aspect of money: That it is humans who
step his younger
                                                                                have created it and humans who instill it with meaning and value. Scond,
brother remonstrated
with him and said:                                                              with objects as with money, what te courtier most values are the sent­
" You like fish, indeed.                                                        ments and emotons embedded in tem-these are what mae tem wort
Why don't you accept                                                            having. The lesson is simple: The more your gifs and your acts of generos­
the present offish ? " In
ity play with sentment, the more power                                          tey are. The object or concept
reply, he said: "It is
that plays with a charged emoton or hits a chord of sentment has more
solely because I like
fish that I would not                                                           power than the money you squander on an expensive yet lifeless present.
accept the fish they
gave me.
Observance VI
Indeed, if I accept the
Akimoto Suzutomo, a weathy adherent of the tea ceremony, once gave his
fish, I will be placed
under an obligation to                                                          page  100 ryo  (gold pieces) and instucted him to purchase a tea bowl of­
them. Once placed
fered by a particula dealer. When te page saw te bowl, he  doubted it
under an obligation t()
was worth that much, and after much bargaining got the price reduced to
them, I will some time
have to bend the law. If                                                        95 ryo.  Days  later,  aer  Suzutomo  had  put  te  bowl to  use, the page
I bend the law, I will be                                                       proudly told hir what he had done.
dismissed from the
"What a ignoramus you are!" replied Suzutomo.  "A    tea bowl tat
premiership. After
anyone asks  100 pieces of gold for  can  only be a family heirloom, and a
being dismissed from
the premiership, I                                                              ting like that is only sold when te family is pressed for money. And in
might not be able to                                                            that  case they will  be  hoping to  find someone  who  will give  even  150
supply myself with fish.
pieces for it. So what sort of fellow is it who does not consider their feel­
On the contrary, ;f I do
ings? Quite apart fom that, a curio that you give  100 ryo for is someting
not accept the fish from
them anti am not                                                                worth having, but one that  has  only cost 95 gives a mean impression. S
dismissed the premier­                                                          never let me see that tea bowl again! "  And he had the bowl loced away,
ship, however fond of
ad never took it out.
fish, I can always
Interpretation
supply myself
with fish. "                                                                    When you insist on paying less, you may save your five ryo, but the insult
HAN-FEI-TZlJ,                                                                   you cause and the cheap impression you create will cost you in reputaton,
CHINESE PHILOSOPflER,
which  is  the  ting the  powerfl  prize  above  all.  Leam to  pay te f
THIRD CENTtJRY H.C.
price-it will save you a lot in the end.
Observance VII
Sometme near the beginning of the seventeenth century in Japan, a group
of generas whiled away the tme before a big battle by staging an incense­
smelling competiton. Each partcipant anted up a prize for te contest's
winners-bows, arrows,  saddles,  ad other items a warrior would covet.
344                                                                             LAW 4 0

Te great Lord Date Masamune happened to pass by and was induced to
I took money only
pacipate. For a prize, he offered the gourd that hung from his belt. Every­
from those who cnuld
one laughed, for no one wanted to win this cheap item. A retainer of the      afford it and were will­
host finally accepted the gourd.                                              ing to go in wirh me in
seheres they fancied
When the party broke up, however, and the generals were chatting
would fleece others.
outside the tent, Masamune brought over his magnificent horse and gave it
They wanted money
to the retainer. "There," he said, "a horse has come out of the gourd." The   for its own sake. I
stuned generas suddenly regretted their seor at Masamune's gift.              wanted it for the luxu­
ries and pleasures it
Interpretation
would afford me. They
Masamune understood the following: Money gives its possessor te ability
were se/dom eoncerned
to give pleasure to others. The more you ca do this, the more you attract     wirh human nature.
They knew little   and
admiraton. When you make a horse come out of a gourd, you give the ul­
cared less  about their
tmate demonstation of your power.
fellow men. If they had
been keener student.l· of
human nature, if they
had given more time tn
companinnship wirh
their fellows and less to
the chase ofthe
Image: The River. To protect                                                  almighty dollar, they
wouldn 't have been
yourself or to save the resource,
such easy marks.
you dam it up. Soon, however,
'"YELLOW KID" WEIL.
the  waters  become   dank   and                                              1875-1976
pestilent.  Only   the   foulest
forms  of life  can  live  in  such
stagnant waters; nothing trav­
eIs  on  them,  all  commerce
stops. Destroy the dam. When
water flows and circulates, it gen­
erates  abundance,  wealth, and
power in ever larger circles. The
River  must  flood  periodically
for  good things  to  fl ourish.
Authority: The great man who is a miser is a great fool, and a man in
high places can have no vice so harmful as avarice. A miserly man can
conquer neither lands nor lordships, for he does not have a plentiful
supply of friends with whom he may work his will. Whoever wants to
have friends must not love his possessions but must acquire friends by
means of fair gifts; for in the same way that the lodestone subtly draws
iran to itself, so the gold and silver that a man gives attract the hearts
of men . ( Te Romance of the Rose, Guillaume de Lorris, c. 1200-1238)
LAW 40                                                                        345

REVERSAL
The powerfl never forget that what is offered for free is inevitably a trick.
Friends who offer favors without asking for payment will iater want some­
thing far dearer than the money you would have paid them. The bargain
has hidden problems, both material and psycological. Leam to pay, then,
and to pay weIl.
On the other hand, this Law offers great opportunities for swindling
ad deception i you apply it from the other side. Dagling the lure of a
free lunch is the con artist's stock in tade.
No man was better at this than the most successfl con artist of our
age, Joseph Weil, a.k.a. "The Yellow Kid." The Yellow Kid leamed early
that what made his swindles possible was his fellow humans' greed. "This
desire to get something for nOthing," he once wrote, "has been very costly
to  many people who have deat with me and with other con men
When people leam-as I doubt they will-that they can't get something
for nOthing, crime will diminish and we shall all live in greater harmony."
Over the years Weil devised many ways to seduce people with the prospect
of easy money. He would hand out "free" real estate-who could resist
such an offer?-and then the suckers would leam they had to pay $25 to
register the sale. Since the land was fee, it seemed worth the high fee, and
the Yellow Kid would mae thousands of dollars on the phony registration.
In  exchange  he would give  his  suckers  a phony  deed.  Other times, he
would tell suckers about a fixed horse race, or a stock that would ea            200
percent in a few weeks. As he spun his stories he would watch the sucker's
eyes open wide at the thought of a fee lunch.
The lesson is simple: Bait your deceptions with the possibility of easy
money.  People  are  essentially lazy,  and want wealth  to fall in  their lap
rather than to  work for  it.  For a small  sum, seIl  them  advice  on how to
make millions (P. T.  Bamum did this later in life), and that small sum will
become a fortune when multiplied by thousands of suckers. Lure people in
with the prospect of easy money and you have the room to work stll more
deceptons on them, since greed is powerfl enough to blind your victims
to anything. And as the Yellow Kid said, half the fn is teaching a moral
lesson: Greed does not pay.
346                                                                              LAW 40

LAW
41
AVOID STEP PING INTO
A GREAT MAN'S SHOES
JUDGMENT
Tat happens first always appears bette and mor org­
inal than what comes afte. Iyou succeed a great man
or have a Ja'ous parent, you will have to accomplish
doubl their achieements to outshine them. Do not get
lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not oJ your own
making:  Establish your  own  name  and  identit  l
changng course. Slay the overbearng Jather disparge
his lgac, and gain power by shining in your own way.
347

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
When Louis XIV died, in 1715, after a glorious fify-five-year reign, all eyes
TII E EXCEI.L':\CI,:
focused on his great-grandson and cosen successor, the fture Louis Xv
0'" Bf:                                                                          <; "'''1ST
Would the boy, only five at the tme, prove as great a leader as the Sun
Many would have
shone like the very                                                              King? Louis XIV had transformed a county on the verge of civil war into
phoenix in their occu­
the preeminent power in Europe. The last years of his reign had been diffi­
pations ifothen had
cuIt-he had been old and tred-but it was hoped that the child would de­
not preceded them,
Being first is a great                                                           velop into the kind of strong mler who would reinvigorate the land and
advantage; with
add to the firm foundaton tat Louis XIV had laid.
eminence, twice as
good, Deal the first                                                             To   this end the child was given the best minds of France as his tutors,
hand and you will win                                                            men who would instuct hir in the arts of statecraf, in the methods that
the upper ground, , ,
the Sun King had perfected. Nothing was neglected in his educaton. But
Those who go first
win fame by right of                                                             when Louis XV came to the throne, in 1726, a sudden change came over
birth, and those who
hir: He no longer had to study or please others or prove hirself. He stood
folIow are like secand
sons, contenting them­                                                           alone at the top of a great county, with wealth and power at his command.
selves with meager                                                               He could do as he wished.
portions, . . .
                                                                                 In the first years of his reign, Louis gave hirself over to pleasure, leav­
Solomon opted wisely
for pacifism, yielding                                                           ing the goverment in the hands of a tusted minister, Andre-Hercule de
warlike things to his
                                                                                 Fleury. This caused little concer, for he was a young man who needed to
father. By changing
course he found it                                                               sow his wild oats, and de Fleury was a good minister. But it slowly became
easier to become a                                                               clear that this was more than a passing phase. Louis had no interest in gov­
hero
                                                                                 erning. His main worry was not France's finances, or a possible war with
And our great Philip Il
governed the entire                                                              Spain, but boredom. He could not stand being bored, and when he was not
world from the throne
                                                                                 hunting deer, or chasing young girls, he whiled away bis time at the gam­
ofhis prudence, aston­
ishing the ages. Ifhis                                                           bling tables, losing huge sums in a single night.
unconquered father                                                               The court, as usual, reflected the tastes of the mler. Gambling and lav­
was a model of energy,
ish parties became the obsession. The courters had no concer with the f­
Philip was a paradigm
of prudence                                                                      This                                                                           ture of Frace-they poured their energies into charming the king, agling
sort of novelty has
for tides that would bring them life pensions, and for cabinet positons de­
helped the well-advised
manding litde work but paying huge salaries. Parasites flocked to the court,
win a place in the roll
of the great.                                                                    and the state's debts swelled.
Without leaving their
                                                                                 In 1745 Louis fell in love with Madame de Pompadour, a woman of
own art, the ingenious
leave the common path                                                            middle-class origin who had managed to rise through her chams, her intel­
and take, even in                                                                ligence, and a good marriage. Madame de Pompadour became the official
professions gray with
age, new steps toward                                                            royal mistress; she also became France's arbiter of taste and fashion. But
eminence. Horace                                                                 the Madame had political ambitions as weIl, and she eventually emerged
yielded epic poetry to
                                                                                 as the country's unofficia prime minister-it was she, not Louis, who
Virgil, and Martial the
Iyrie to Horace. Terenee                                                         wielded hiring-and-firing power over France's most important ministers.
opted for comedy,                                                                As he grew older Louis only needed more diversion. On the grounds
Persius for satire, eaeh
of Versailles he built a brothel, Pac aux Cerfs, which housed some of the
hoping to be first in his
genre. Bold faney never                                                          prettiest young girls of France. Underground passages and hidden stair­
succumbed to faeile
cases gave Louis access at all hours. Mter Madame de Pompadour died, i
imitation.
1764, she was succeeded as royal mistess by Madame du Barry, who soon
A paCKET M I R R a R
FOR HEROES,                                                                      came to dominate the court, and who, like de Pompadour before her,
BALTASAR GRACIAN,
began to meddle in affairs of state. If a minister did not please her he would
TRANSLATED BY
                                                                                 CHRISTOPHER MAURER,                                                            find himself fired. All of Europe was aghast when du Barry, the daughter of
                                                                                 1 996
                                                                                                                                                                a baker, managed to arrange the firing of Etienne de Choiseul, the foreig
348                                                                              LAW 4 1

minister and France's most able diplomat. He had shown her too litde re­
spect. As time went by, swindlers and chalatans made their nests in Ver­
LIFE OF PERICLES
sailles, and enticed Louis's interest in astrology, the occult, and faudulent
As a young man Peri­
business deals. The young and pampered teenager who had taen over
eies was ineiined to
France years before had only grown worse with age.
shrink from facing the
                                                                                                          The motto that became attached to Louis's reign was ''pres moi, le   people. One reason for
deluge'                                                                         !                         "After me the flood," or, Let France rot ater I am gone. And in­     this was that he was
considered to bear a
deed when Louis did go, in 1774, wor out by debauchery, his country and
distinct resemblance to
his own finances were in horrible disarray. His grandson Louis XVI inher­
the tyrant Pisistratus,
ited a realm in desperate need of reform and a stong leader. But Louis          and when men who
XVI was even weaker than his grandfather, and could only watch as the           were weil on in years
remarked on the charm
country descended into revolution. In 1792 the republic intoduced by the
of Perieies' voice and
French Revolution declaed the end of the monarchy, and gave the king a          the smoothness and
new name, "Louis the Last." A few months later he kneeled on the guillo­        fluency ofhis speech,
tne, his about-to-be-severed head stripped of all the radiance and power        they were astonished at
the resemblance
that the Sun King had invested in the crown.
between the two. The
fact that he was rich
Interpretation                                                                  and that he came of a
distinguished family
From a country that had descended into civil war in the late 1640s, Louis
and possessed exceed­
XI forged the mightiest realm in Europe. Great generals would tremble
ingly powerful friends
i his presence. A cook once made a mistake in preparing a dish and com­         made the fear of
mitted suicide rather than face the king's wrath. Louis XIV had many mis­       ostracism very real to
him, and at the begin­
tesses, but their power ended in the bedroom. He filled his court with the
ning of his career he
most brilliant minds of the age. The symbol of his power was Versailles:
took no part in politics
Refsing to accept the palace of his forefathers, the Louvre, he built his       but devoted himself to
ow palace in what was then te middle of nowhere, symbolizing that this          soldiering, in which he
showed great daring
was a new order he had founded, one without precedent. He made Ver­
and enterprise.
sailles the centerpiece of his reign, a place that all te power of Europe
However, the time came
envied and visited with a sense of awe. In essence, Louis took a great          when Aristides was
void-the decaying monarchy of France-ad filled it with his own sym­             dead, Themistoeies in
exile, and Cimon
bols and radiant power.
frequently absent on
Louis XV, on the other had, symbolizes the fate of all those who in­
distant campaigns.
herit something large or who follow in a great man's footsteps. It would        Then at last Pericles
seem easy for a son or successor to build on the grand foundaton lef for        decided to at/ach
himselfto the people's
tem, but in the realm of power the opposite is true. The pampered, in­
party and to take up
dulged son almost always squanders the inheritace, for he does not start
the cause of the poor
wt the father's need to fill a void. As Machiavelli states, necessity is what   and the many instead
impels men to tae action, and once the necessity is gone, only rot and          ofthat ofthe rich and
the few, in spite of the
decay are left. Having no need to increase his store of power, Louis XV in­
fact that this was quite
evitably succumbed to inerta. Under him, Versailles, the symbol of the
contrary to his own
Su King's authority, became a pleasure paace of incomparable banality,          temperament, which
a kind of Las Vegas of the Bourbon monarchy. It came to represent all that      was thoroughly aristo­
cratic. He was afraid,
te oppressed peasanty of Frace hated about their king, ad during the
apparently, of being
Revolution they looted it with glee.
suspected ofaiming at
Louis XV had only one way out of te tap awaiting the son or succes­             a dictatorship; so that
sor of a man like the Sun King: to psycologically begin fom nothing, to         when he saw that
LAW 4 1                                                                         349

Cimon 's  sympathie.l'                                                         denigrate the past and his inheritance, and to move in a totally new direc­
were strongly wilh the
tion, creatng his own world. Assuming you have the choice, it would be
nobles and that Cimon
better to avoid the situaton altogether, to place yourself where there is a
was the idol ofthe aris­
tocratic party, Pericle,l'                                                     vacuum of power, where you can be the one to bring order out of chaos
began to ingratiate                                                            without having to compete with another star in the sky. Power depends on
himself with the people,
appearing larger than other people, ad when you are lost in the shadow of
partly for selrpreserva­
the father, the king, the great predecessor, you cannot possibly project suc
tion and partly by way
ofsecuring power                                                               a presence.
against his rival.
He now entered upon
But when the began to make sovereignty hereditary, the children quickly
a new mode of Iife.
degenerated frm theirfathers; and, sofarJom trying to equal theirfather's
He was never to be
seen walking in any                                                            virtues, the considered that a prince had nothing else to do than to excel
street except the one
alt the rest in idleness, indulgence, and every other variety of pleasure.
which led to the
                                                                                                                                                             Niccolo Machiavelli, J 46 9   1527
market-plaee and the
council chamber.
THE L1FE OE  PERICLES,
                                                                               PUJTARCII,                                                                    OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
c. A.D. 46                                                                     1 20
Alexander the Great had a dominat passion as a young man-an intense
dislike for his father, King Philip of Macedonia. He hated Philip's cunning,
cautious style of ruling, his bombastic speeches, his drinking and whoring,
and his love of wrestling and of other wastes of tme. Alexander knew he
had to make hirself the very opposite of his domineering father: He would
force hirself to be bold and reckless, he would contol his tongue and be a
T I I I':  LI!'F  O!'                                                          1'11<:'1'11
man of few words, and he would not lose precious time in pursuit of plea­
PEIU:CIIO. I'\I\TI':H
sures that brought no glory. Alexander also resented the fact that Philip
(', l-.)()-l::
had conquered most of Greece: "My father will go on conquering tll there
How beneficial poverty
is nothing extraordinary lef for me to do," he once complained. While
may sometimes be t
other sons of powerful men were content to inherit wealth and live a life of
those wilh talent, and
how it may serve as a                                                          leisure, Alexander wated only to outdo his father, to obliterate Philip's
powerful goad to make
name fom history by surpassing his accomplishments.
them perfeet or exeel­
Alexander itched to show others how superior he was to his father. A
lent in whatever occu­
pation they might                                                              Thessalian horse-dealer once brought a prize horse named Bucephalus to
choose, can be seen                                                            seIl to Philip. None of the king's grooms could get near the horse            it was
very clearly in the
far too savage-and Philip berated the merchant for bringing him such a
actions ofPietro
useless beast. Watching the whole affair, Alexander scowled and COffi­
Perugino. Wishing by
means of his ability to                                                        mented, "What a horse they are losing for want of skill ad spirit to ma­
attain some respectable                                                        age hir!" When he had said this several times, Philip had finally had
rank, after leaving
enough, and challenged hir to take on the horse. He called the merchant
disastrous calamilies
back, secretly hoping his son would have a nasty fall ad lea a bitter les­
behind in Perugia and
coming to Florenee, he                                                         son. But Alexander was the one to teach the lesson: Not only did he mount
remained there many                                                            Bucephalus, he maaged to ride hir at fll gallop, taing the horse that
months in poverty,
would later carry hir all te way to India. The courtiers applauded wildly,
sleeping in a ehesI,
but Philip seethed inside, seeing not a son but a riyal to his power.
since he had no olher
bed; he tured nighl                                                            Alexander's defiance of his father grew bolder. One day the two men
into day, and wilh the                                                         had a heated agument before the entire court, and Philip drew his sword
greatest zeal continu­
as if to strike his son; having drunk too much wine, however, the king
ally applied himsel!, to
stumbled. Alexander pointed at his father and jeered, "Men of Macedonia
350                                                                            LAW 4 1

see there the man who is preparing to pass fom Europe to Asia. He cannot         the study ofhis profes­
sion. After painting had
pass fom one table to aother without faling."
become second nature
When  Alexander  was  eighteen,  a  disgruntled  courtier  murdered
to him, Pietro 's only
Philip . As word of the regicide spread through Greece, city after city rose     pleasure was always to
up in rebellion against their Macedonian rulers. Philip's advisers counseled     be w(Jrking in his aaft
ami constantly to be
Aexander, now the king, to proceed cautously, to do as Philip had done
painting. And because
ad conquer through cunning. But Alexader would do things his way: He
he always had the
marched to the frthest reaches of the kingdom, suppressed the rebellious         dread ofpoverty be]!Jre
towns, and reunited the empire with bruta efficiency.                            his eyes, he did things
to make money which
As  a young rebel grows  older, his strugle against the  father ofen
he probably would not
wanes, and he gradually comes to resemble the very man he had wanted to
have bothered to do
def. But Alexander' s loathing of his father did not end with Philip' s death.   had he not been fon'ed
to support himse/!
Once he had consolidated Greece, he set his eyes on Persia, the prize that
Perhaps wealth would
ha eluded his father, who had dreamed of conquering Asia. If he defeated
have closed to him and
te Persians, Alexander would fnally surpass Philip in glory and fame.            his ta/ent the path to
Alexader crossed into Asia with an army of 35,000 to face a Persian              excellence just as
force numbering over a million. Before engagng the Persians in battle he                                                                                      poverty had opened it
                                                                                 up to him, bllt need
passed through the town of Gordium. Here, in the town's main temple,
                                                                                                                                                              spurred him on sinee he
tere stood an ancient chariot tied with cords made of the rind of the cor­       desired to rise from
nel tee. Legend had it that any man who could undo tese cords                    the                                                                          such a miserable and
lowly position-if not
Gordian knot-would rule the world. Many had tied to unte the enor­
perhaps 10 the summit
mous and inticate knot, but none had succeeded. Alexander, seeing he
and supreme heighl of
could not possibly untie the knot with his bare hands, took out his sword        excellence, Ihen al least
and with one slash cut it in half. This symbolic ge sture showed the world       to a point where he
could have enough to
tat he would not do as others, but would blaze his own path.
live on, For this reamn,
Against astounding odds, Alexader conquered the Persians. Most ex­
he took no notice of
                                                                                 pected hir to stop there-it was a great tiumph, enough to secure his         cold, hunger, discom­
f                                                                                ae for  etemity.  But Alexander had the same relatonship  to  his own        fort, incon venience, toil
or shame if he could
deeds as he had to his father: His conquest of Persia represented the past,
only live one day in
ad he wanted never to rest on past tiumphs, or to allow te past to out­
ease and repose; and he
shine the present. He moved on to India, extending his empire beyond all         would always say-and
known limits. Only his disguntled and weary soldiers prevented hir from          as if it were a proverb­
that after bad weather,
going farther.
good weather must
follow, and that during
Interpretation                                                                   the good weather
Aexander represents an extemely uncommon type in history: the son of             houses must be buill for
shelter in times oI need,
a f                                                                              aous and successfl man who manages to surpass the father in glory
L1VES OE THE ARTISTS,
ad power. The reason this type is uncommon is simple: The father most
GIORGIO VASARI,
often manages to amass his fortune, his kingdom, because he begins with          15ll-1574
little or nothing. A desperate urge impels hir to succeed-he has nothing
to lose by cunning ad impetuousness, and has no famous father of his
own  to  compete  against.  This  kind  of man  has  reason  to  believe  in
himself-to believe that his way of doing things is the best, because, after
al, it worked for hir.
When a man like this has a son, he becomes domineering and oppres­
sive, imposing his lessons on the son, who is  starting off life in circum­
st                                                                               ces  totally  different  from  those  in  which the  father  hirself bega.
LAW 4 1                                                                          351

Instead of allowing the son to go in a new direction, the father will try to
put hir in his own shoes, perhaps secretly wishing the boy will fail, as
THf:  PHOBLE\1 OF
Philip half wanted to see Alexander thrown from Bucephalus_ Fathers env
PA I ' I .  \IO H I' I I Y
their sons' youth and vigor, afer all, and their desire is to contol ad dom­
The sfightest aequain­
tanee with ehess shows                                                         inate_ The sons of such men tend to become cowed and cautious, terrified
one that it is a play­                                                         of losing what their fathers have gained.
substitute Jor the art oJ
                                                                               The son will never step out of his father's shadow unless he adopts the
war and indeed it has
been a Javorite recre­                                                         ruthless stategy of Alexander: disparage the past, create YOUf own king­
ation oJsome oJthe                                                             dom, put the father in the shadows instead of letting hir do the same to
greatest military lead­
                                                                               you. If you cannot materially start fom ground zero                            it would be foolish
ers, Jrom William the
Conquemr to                                                                    to renounce an inheritace-you can at least begin fom ground zero psy­
Napoleon.                                                                      chologically, by throwing off the weight of the past and charting a new di­
In the contest between
                                                                               rection. Alexander instinctvely recognized that privileges of birth are
the opposing armies
the same principles oJ                                                         impediments to power. Be merciless With the past, then-not only wit
both strategy and tacties                                                      your father and his father but with your own earlier achievements_ Only
are displayed as in
                                                                               the weak rest on their laureis and dote on past tiumphs; in the game of
aetual war, the same
Joresight and powers oJ                                                        power there is never time to rest
caleulation are neees­
sary, the same capacity
Jor divining the plans
oJthe opponent, and                                                            KEYS TO POWER
the rigor with which                                                           In many ancient kingdoms, for example Bengal and Sumata, afer the
decisions are Jollowed
                                                                               king had ruled for several yeas his subjects would execute hir. This was
by their eonsequences
is, if an ything, even                                                         done partly as a ritual of renewal, but also to prevent hir from growing too
more ruthless. More                                                            powerfl-for the king would generaly ty to establish a permanent order,
than that, it is plain that
                                                                               at the expense of other families and of his own sons. Instead of protecting
the uneonscious motive
actuating the players is                                                       the tibe and leading it in tmes of war, he would attempt to dominate it.
not the mere love oJ                                                           And so he would be beaten to death, or executed in a elaborate ritua.
pugnaeity characteristic
                                                                               Now that he was no longer around for his honors to go to his head, he
oJ all competitive
games, but the grimmer                                                         could be worshipped as a god_ Meawhile the field had been cleared for a
one offather-murder.                                                           new and youthfl order to establish itself.
It is true that the origi­
                                                                               The ambivaent, hostile attitude towards the king or father figure also
nal goal of eapturing
the king has been given                                                        finds expression in legends of heroes who do not know their father. Moses,
"p, but from the point                                                         the archetyp al man of power, was found abandoned among the bulrushes
of view oJ motive there
                                                                               and never knew his parents; without a father to compete with hir or limit
is, except in respeet oJ
crudity, not appreciable                                                       hir, he could attan the heights of power. Hercules had no earthly father­
change in the present                                                          he was the son of the god Zeus. Later in his life Alexander the Great sprea
goal of sterilizing him
                                                                               the story that the god Jupiter Ammon had sired hir, not Philip of Mace­
in immobility
"Checkmate " means                                                             don_ Legends and rituals like these eliminate the human father because he
literally "the king is                                                         symbolizes the destructve power of the past
dead. "
The past prevents the young hero fom creating his own world-he
. . . Our knowledge of
fhe unconsciou,\' moti­                                                        must do as his father did, even afer that father is dead or powerless. The
vation ofchess-playing
hero must bow and scrape before his predecessor and yield to tradition
teils us that what it
and precedent What had success in te past must be carried over to the
represented could only
have been the wish to                                                          present, even though circumstances have greatly changed. The past also
overcome the father in                                                         weighs the hero down with an inheritance that he is terrified of losing,
an acceplable way
making hir tmid and cautous.
It is no doubl signij-
Power depends on the ability to fill a void, to occupy a field that has
352                                                                            LAW 4 1

been cleared of the dead weight of the past. Only after the father figure has    cant that [nineteenth­
                                                                                 century chess cham­
been properly done away with will you have the necessary space to create
                                                                                 pion Paul} Morphy's
ad establish a new order. There are several strategies you can adopt to ac­      soaring odyssey ;nto
complish this-variatons on the execution of the king that disguise the vio­      the higher realms of
                                                                                                                                                          chess began just a year
lence of the impulse by channeling it in socially acceptable forms.
                                                                                                                                                          after the unexpectedly
Perhaps the simplest way to escape the shadow of the past is simply to           sudden death of his
belittle it, playing on the tmeless antagonism between the generations, stir­                                                                             father, which had been
                                                                                 a great shock to hir,
rg up the young against the old. For this you need a convenient older fg­
                                                                                 and we may surm;se
ue to pillory. Mao Tse-tung, confrontng a culture that fiercely resisted                                                                                  that his brilliant effort
chage, played on the suppressed resentent against the overbearing pres­                                                                                   ofsublimation was, like
                                                                                                                                                          Shakespeare's Harlet
ence of the venerable Confcius in Chinese culture. John F Kennedy
                                                                                                                                                          and Freuds The Inter­
kew the dangers of gettng lost in the past; he radically distinguished his                                                                                pretation of Drears, a
presidency from that of his predecessor, Dwight D. Eisenhower, and also                                                                                   reaction to this critical
                                                                                 event
fom the preceding decade, the  1950s, which Eisenhower personified.
                                                                                                                                                          Something should now
Kennedy, for instance, would not play the dull ad fatherly game of golf­                                                                                  be said about the recep­
a sybol of retirement and privilege, ad Eisenhower's passion. Instead he         tion Morphy 's
                                                                                                                                                          successes met with, for
played football on the White House lawn. In every aspect his administa­
                                                                                 they were of such a
ton represented vigor and youth, as opposed to the stodgy Eisenhower.            kind as to raise the
Kennedy had discovered an old tuth: The young are easily set against the         question whether his
                                                                                 subsequent collapse
old, since they year to mae their own place i the world and resent the
                                                                                 may not have been
shadow of their fathers.                                                                                                                                  influenced through his
The distance you establish fom your predecessor ofen demands                     perhaps belonging to
                                                                                                                                                          the type that Freud has
some symbolism, a way of advertsing itself publicly. Louis XIV, for exam­
                                                                                 described under the
pIe, created such symbolism when he rejected the taditional palace of the        name ofDie ar
Frenc kings and built his own palace of Versailles. King Philip 11 of Spain      Erfolge scheitern
                                                                                 ("Those wrecked by
did the same when he created his center of power, the palace of EI Esco­
                                                                                 success")                                                                Couched
ra, i what was then the middle of nowhere. But Louis carried the game                                                                                     in more psychological
fer: He would not be a king like his father or earlier ancestors, he                                                                                      language, was Morphy
affrighted at his own
would not wear a crown or carry a scepter or sit on a throne, he would es­
presumptuousness
tblish a new kind of imposing authorit with symbols and rituals of its           when the light of
publicity was thrown
own. Louis made his ancestors' rituals into laughable relics of the past. Fol­
on [his great success?}
low his example: Never let yourself be seen as following your predeces­
Freud has pointed out
sor's pat. If you do you will never surpass                                      h. You must physicaly                                                    that the people who
demonstate your difference, by establishing a style and symbolism that                                                                                    break under the strain
of too great success do
sets you apart.
so because they can
The Roman emperor Augustus, successor to Julius Caesar, understood               endure it only in imagi­
nation, not in reality. To
tis thorougly. Caesar had been a great genera, a theatical figure whose
castrate the father in    a
spectacles kept the Romas entertaned, an interatonal emissary seduced
dream is a very differ­
by the charms of Cleopatra-a lager-than-life figure. So Augustus, despite        ent matterfrom do;ng
bis ow theatrical tendencies, competed with Caesa not by tying to outdo          it in reality. The real
situation provokes the
bim but by differentiatng hirself from hir: He based his power on a re­
unconscious guilt in its
t                                                                                to Roman simplicity, an austerity of both style and substance. Against   full force, and the
penalty may be mental
te memory of Caesar's sweeping presence Augustus posed a quiet and
collapse.
manly dignity.
THE PROBLEM OF PAUL
The problem with the overbearing predecessor is that he fills the vistas         MORPHY,
ERNEST JONES,
before you with symbols of the past. You have no room to create your own
1951
nae. To   deal with this situation you need to hunt out the vacuumsthose
LAW 41                                                                           353

areas in culture that have been lef vacant and in whic you can become
the first and principal figure to shine.
When Pericles of Athens was about to launch a career as a statesman,
he looked for the one thing that was missing in Athenian politcs. Most of
the great politcians of his tme had allied themselves with the aistocracy;
indeed Pericles himself had aristocratic tendencies. Yet he decided to throw
in his hat with the city's democratic elements. Te coice had nothing to
do with his personal beliefs, but it launched him on a brilliant career. Out
of necessity he became a man of the people. Instead of competing i a
arena filled with great leaders both past and present, he would make a
name for himselfwhere no shadows could obscure his presence.
When the painter Diego de Veläzquez began his career, he knew he
could not compete in refinement and technique with the great Renaissance
painters who had come before him. Instead he chose to work in a style that
by the standards of the time seemed coarse and roug, in a way that had
never been seen before. And in this style he excelled. There were mem­
bers of the Spanish court who wated to demonstrate their own break with
the past; the newness of Veläzquez's style thrilled them. Most people are
afraid to break so boldly with traditon, but they secretly admire those who
can break up the old forms and reinvigorate the culture. This is why there
is so much power to be gained from entering vacuums and voids.
There is a kind of stubbom stupidity that recurs throughout history,
ad is a strong impediment to power: The supersttous belief that if the
person before you succeeded by doing A, B, and C, you can re-create their
success by doing te same thing. This cookie-cutter approach will seduce
the uncreative, for it is easy, and appeals to their tmidity ad their laziness.
But circumstances never repeat themselves exactly.
When General Douglas MacArthur assumed commad of American
forces in the Philippines during World Wa II, an assistant handed him a
book containing the vaious precedents established by the commanders
before hir, the methods that had been successfl for them. MacArthur
asked the assistant how many copies there were of this book. Six, the assis­
tant answered. "WeIl," the general replied, "you get all those six copies to­
gether  and  bum  them-every  one  of them.  I'll  not  be . bound  by
precedents. Any  time  a problem comes up,  I'll make  the decision at
once-immediately." Adopt this ruthless strategy toward the past: Bum all
the books, ad tain yourself to react to circumstances as they happen.
You may believe that you have separated yourself from the predeces­
sor or father figure, but as you grow older you must be etemally vigilant
lest you become the father you had rebelIed against. As a young man, Mao
Tse-tung disliked his father and in the stuggle against hir found his own
identity and a new set of values. But as he aged, his father's ways crept back
in. Mao's father had valued manual work over intellect; Mao had scoffed at
this as a young man, but as   he grew older he unconsciously retumed to   his
father's views and echoed such outdated ideas by forcing a whole genera­
tion of Chinese intellectuals into manual labor, a nightaish mistae that
354                                                                               LAW  4 1

cost his regime dearly. Remember: You are your own father. Do not let
yourself spend years creating yourself only to let your guard down and
allow the ghost of the past-father, habit, history-to sneak back in.
Finally, as noted in the story of Louis XV, plenitude and prosperity
tend to mae us lazy and inactive:                                                Wen our power is secure we have no
need to act. This is a serious danger, especially for those who achieve suc­
cess and power at an early age. The playwright Tennessee Willias, for in­
stce, found hirself skyrocketed from obscurity to fae by the success of
Te Glss Menagerie. "The sort of life which I had had previous to this popu­
la success," he later wrote, "was one that required endurance, a life of
clawing and scratching, but it was a good life because it was the sort of life
for which the human orgaism is created. I was not aware of how much
vt energy had gone into this struggle untl the stuggle was removed.
Tis was security at last. I sat down and looked about me and was suddenly
very depressed." Willias had a nervous breakdown, which may in fact
have been necessay for hir: Pushed to the psychological edge, he could
stt writing wit the old vitality again, and he produced A Streetcar Named
Desire. Fyodor Dostoyevsky, similarly, whenever he wrote a successfl
novel, would feel tat the financia securit he had gained made the act of
creaton unnecessary. He would tae his entire savings to the casino and
would not leave until he had gabled away his last penny. Once reduced
to povert he could write again.
It is not necessary to go to such extemes, but you must be prepared to
retur to square one psychologically rather than growing fat and lazy with
prosperity. Pablo Picasso could deal with success, but only by constantly
chaging the style of his paintng, often breaking completely with what
had made hir successfl before. How often our early triumphs turn us
ito a kind of caricature of ourselves. Powerful people recognize these
taps; like Alexander the Great, they struggle constantly to re-create them­
selves. The father must not be allowed to retur; he must be slain at every
step of the way.
Image: The Father. He casts a
giant shadow over his children,
keeping  them  in  thrall  long
after he is gone by tying them
to   the   past,   squashing  their
youthful   spirit,   and   forcing
them down the same tired path
he followed hirself. His tricks
are many. At every cross­
roads you must slay the father
and step out of his shadow.
LAW 4 1                                                                          355

Authority: Beware of stepping into a
great ma's shoes-you will have to
accomplish twice as much to surpass
hir. Those who foBow are taken for
imitators. No matter how much they
sweat, they will never shed that bur­
den. It is an uncommon skill to find a
new path for excellence, a modern
route to celebrity. There are many
roads to singularity, not aB of them
weB taveled. The newest ones can be
arduous, but they are ofen shortcuts to
greatess. (Baltasar Graciän, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
The shadow of a great predecessor could be used to advatage if it is co­
sen as a tick, a tactc that can be discarded once it has brought you power.
Napoleon III used the  name ad legend of his illustrious grand-unde
Napoleon Bonaparte to help hir become first president ad then emperor
of France. Once on the throne, however, he did not stay ted to the past; he
quickly showed how different his reign would be, and was careful to   keep
the public from expectng hir to attain the heights that Bonaparte had at­
taned.
The past ofen has elements worth appropriatng, qualites that would
be foolish to reject out of a need to distnguish yourself. Even Alexander
the Great recognized and was influenced by his father's skill in organizing
an army. Maing a display of doing tings differently fom your predeces­
sor can make you seem childish and in fact out of control, unless your ac­
tions have a logic of their OW.
Joseph 11, son of the Austian empress Maia Theresa, made a show of
doing the exact opposite of his mother-dressing like an ordinay citzen,
staying in inns instead of palaces, appearing as the "people's emperor."
Maria Theresa, on the other hand, had been regal and aristocratc. The
problem was that she had also been beloved, a empress who mIed wisely
356                                                                           LAW 4 1

aer years of lea                                                                ing the hard way. If you have the kind of intelligence
ad instnct that will point you in the right direction, playing the rebel will
not be dangerous. But if you are mediocre, as Joseph I I  was in comparison
to   his mother, you are better off leaming fom your predecessor's knowl­
edge and experience, which are based on something real.
Finally, it is ofen wise to keep an eye on the young, YOUf fture rivals
in power. Just as you try to rid yourself of your father, they                  w                                                                         soon play
te same trick on you, denigratng everything you have accomplished. Just
a                                                                               you rise by rebelling against the past, keep a eye on those rising from
below, and never give them the chance to do the same to you.
The great Baroque artist and architect Pieto Bemini was a master at
sniffing out younger potential rivals and keeping them in his shadow. One
day a young stonemason named Fracesco Borromini showed Bemini his
achitectural  sketches.  Recognizing  his  talent immediately,  Bemini  in­
statly hired Borromini as his assistant, which delighted the young man but
wa                                                                              actualy only a tactc to keep him elose at hand, so that he could play
psychological games on him and create in hir a kind of inferiority com­
plex. And indeed,  despite Borromini's brilliance, Bemini has the greater
f                                                                               a                                                                         e. His stategy with Borromini he made a lifelong practice: Feaing that
te great sculptor Alessadro Algardi, for example, would eelipse hir in
f                                                                               ae, he arranged it so that Algadi could only find work as his assistat.
Ad any assistant who rebelled against Bemini and tied to strike out on
his own would find his career ruined.
LAW 41                                                                          357

LAW
42
STRIKE THE SHE PHERD
AND THE SHEE P
WILL SCATTER
JUDGMENT
Trouble can oJen be traced to a singl strng individ­
ual-the stirrer the arrogant underling, the poisoner oJ
goodwill. Iyou allow such peopl room to operate, othe
will succumb to their inuence. Do not waitJor the tru­
bls the cause to multiply, do not tr to negotiate with
them-the are irredeemabl. Neutrlize their influence
by isolating or banishing them. Strke at the source oJ the
troubl and the shee will scatter
358

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
Near the end of the sixth century B.C., the city-state of Athens overthrew
TIE (:()\\HII' ST OF  1'1,:111
the series of petty tyrants who had dominated its politics for decades. It es­
The struggle now
tablished instead a democracy that was to last over a century, a democ­
became fiercer than
racy that became the source of its power and its proudest achievement.
ever around the royal
But as the democracy evolved, so did a problem the Athenians had never           litter [ofAtahualpa,
faced: How to deal with those who did not concer themselves with the             king ofthe Incan
empire), It reeled more
cohesion of a small city surrounded by enemies, who did not work for its
and more, ami at
greater glory, but thought of only themselves and their own ambitions and
length, several ofthe
petty intrigues? The Athenians understood that these people, if left alone,      nobles who supported
would sow dissension, divide the city into factions, and stir up anxieties,      it having been slain, it
                                                                                 was overtumed, and
all of which could lead to the ruin of their democracy.
                                                                                 the Indian prince
Violent punishment no longer suited the new, civilized order that                would have come with
Athens had created. Instead the citizens found another, more satisfing,          violence to the ground,
had not his fall been
ad less brutal way to deal with the chronically selfish: Every year they
broken by the efforts of
would gather in the marketplace and write on a piece of earthenware, an
Pizarro and some other
ostrakon, the name of an individual they wanted to see banished from the
ofthe cavaliers, who
city for ten years. If a particular name appeared on six thousand ballots,       caught him in their
arms, The imperial
that person would instantly be exiled. If no one received six thousand
borla was instantly
votes, the person with the most ostraka recording his name would suffer
snatched from his
the ten-year "ostracism." This ritual expulsion became a kind of festival­       temples by a soldier,
what a joy to be able to banish those irritating, anxiety-inducing individu­     and the unhappy
monarch, strongly
as who wanted to rise above the group they should have served.
secured, was removed
In 490 B.C., Aristides, one of the great generals of Athenian history,
to a neighboring build­
helped defeat the Persians at the battle of Marathon. Meanwhile, off the         ing where he was care­
battlefield, his fairness as a judge had eamed hir the nickname "The             fully guarded,
A ll attempt at resis­
Just." But as the years went by the Athenians came to dislike hir. He
tance now ceased, The
made such a show of his righteousness, and this, they believed, disguised
fate of the Inca
his feelings of superiority and scorn for the common folk. His omnipres­         [Atahualpaj so on
ence in Athenian politics became obnoxious; the citizens grew tired of           spread over town and
country, The charm
hearing hir called "The Just." They feared that this was just the type of
that might have held
man-judgmental, haughty-who would eventually str up fierce divi­
the Peruvians together
sions among them. In 482 B.C.,  despite Aristides' invaluable expertise in       was dissolved. Every
the continuing war with the Persians, they collected the ostraka and had         man thought only of
his own safety. Even
hir banished.
the [IncanJ soldiery
After Aristides' ostracism, the great general Themistoeles emerged as
encamped on the adja­
the city's premier leader. But his many honors and victories went to his         cent fields took the
head, and he too became arrogant and overbearing, constantly reminding           alarm, and, leaming the
fatal tidings, were seen
the Athenians of his tiumphs in battle, the temples he had built, the dan­
jying in every direction
gers he had fended off. He seemed to be saying that without hir the city
before their pursuers,
would come to ruin. And so, in 472 B.C., Themistoeles' name was filled in        who in the heat of
on the ostraka and the city was rid of his poisonous presence.                   triumph showed no
                                                                                 touch ofmercy. At
The greatest politcal figure in fifth-century Athens was undoubtedly
                                                                                 length night, more piti­
Perieles. Although several times threatened with ostracism, he avoided           ful than man, threw her
that fate by maintaining elose ties with the people. Perhaps he had leamed       friendly mantle over
a lesson as a child from his favorite tutor, the incomparable Damon, who         the fugitives, and the
LAW 42                                                                           359

scallered traops of                                                             excelled above all other Athenians in his intelligence, his musical skills,
Pizarro rallied on ce
and his rhetorical abilities. It was Damon who had trained Pericles in the
more at the sound of
arts of ruling. But he, too, suffered ostacism, for his superior airs and his
the trumpet in
the bloody square of                                                            insulting manner towad the commoners strred up too much resentment.
Cajamarca                                                                       Toward the end of the century there lived a man named Hyperbolus.
{Atahualpa] was re ver­
Most writers of the time describe hir as the city's most worthless citizen:
enced as more than a
He did not care what anyone thought of hir, ad slandered whomever he
human. He was not
merely the head of the                                                          disliked. He amused some, but irritated many more. In 417 B.C., Hyperbo­
state, but the point to
lus saw an opportunity to stir up anger against the two leading politicians
which all its institutions
of the time, Alcibiades and Nicias. He hoped that one of the two would be
converged as to a
ostracized and that he would rise in that man's place. His campaign
common center-the
keystone of the politi­                                                         seemed likely to succeed: The Athenians disliked Alcibiades' flamboyant
cal fabric which must                                                           and carefee lifestyle, and were wary of Nicias' wealth and aloofness.
fall to pieces by its own
                                                                                They seemed certain to ostacize one or the other. But Alcibiades ad
weight when that was
withdrawn. So it fared                                                          Nicias, aIthough they were otherwise enemies, pooled their resources and
on the {execution] of                                                           managed to tur the ostracism on Hyperbolus instead. His obnoxious­
Atahualpa. His death
ness, they argued, could only be terminated by banishment.
not only left the throne
Earlier sufferers of ostracism had been formidable, powernIl men.
vacant, without any
certain successor, but                                                          Hyperbolus, however, was a low buffo on, and with his banishment the
the manner 0 fit                                                                Athenians feit that ostracism had been degraded. And so they ended the
announced to the
practice that for nearly a hundred years had been one of the keys to keep­
Peruvian people that
ing the peace within Athens.
a hand stranger than
that of their [ncas had
now seized the scepter,                                                         Interpretation
and that the dynasty
The ancient Athenians had social instincts unknown today-the passage
of the Children of the
of centuries has blunted them. Citzens in the true sense of the word, the
Sun had passed
away forever.                                                                   Athenians sensed the dangers posed by asocial behavior, and saw how
THE CONQUEST OF PERU,                                                           such behavior ofen disguises itself in other forms: the holier-than-thou at­
WILLlAM H. PRESCOTT,
titude that silently seeks to impose its standards on others; overweening
1 847
ambition at the expense of the common good; the flaunting of superiority;
quiet scheming; terminal obnoxiousness. Some of these behaviors would
eat away at the city's cohesion by creating factons ad sowing dissension,
others would ruin the democratic spirit by making the common citizen
feel inferior and envious. The Athenians did not ty to reeducate people
who acted in these ways, or to absorb them somehow into the group, or to
impose a violent punishment that would only create other problems. The
solution was quick and effective: Get rid of them.
Within any group, trouble can most ofen be traced to a singe source,
the unhappy, chronically dissatisfied one who will always str up dissen­
sion and infect the group with his or her ill ease. Before you know what hit
you the dissatisfaction spreads. Act before it becomes impossible to disen­
tangle one strand of misery from another, or to see how the whole thing
started. First, recognize toublemakers by their overbearing presence, or
by their complaining nature. Once you spot them do not try to reform
them or appease them-that will only make things worse. Do not attack
them, whether directly or indirectly, for they are poisonous in nature and
360                                                                             LAW 42

will work underground to destoy you. Do a the Athenians did: Baish
tem before it is too late. Separate them fom the group before they be­
THE  WOLVES ,\ " D
come the eye of a whirlpool. Do not give them tme to stir up anxieties
THE SHEEP
ad sow discontent; do not give them room to move. Let one person suf­
Once upon a time, the
fer   so that the rest can live in peace.
wolves sent an embassy
to the sheep, desiring
Wen the tree falls, the monkes scatter                                          that there might be
peace between them for
Chinese saying
the time to come.
" Why, " said they,
"should we be for ever
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II                                                                                                                           waging this deadly
                                                                                                                                                   strife? Those wicked
In 1296 the cardinals of the Catholic Church met in Rome to select a new
                                                                                                                                                   dogs are the cause of
pope.  They chose  Cardinal  Gaetani, for he was incomparably shrewd;                                                                              all; they are incessantly
such a ma would make the Vatcan a great power. Taking the na                    e Boni­                                                            barking at us, and
provoking uso Send
face VIII, Gaetani soon proved he deserved the cardinals' high opinion of
them away, and there
hir: He plotted his moves careflly in advance, ad stopped at nothing to
will be no longer any
get his way. Once in power, Boniface quickly crushed his rivals and uni­        obstacle to our eternal
fied the Papal States. The European powers bega to fear hir, ad sent            friendship and peace. "
The silly sheep listened,
delegates to negotate with hir. The German King Albrecht of Austria
the dogs were
even yielded some territory to Boniface. All was proceeding according to
dismissed, and the
the pope's plan.                                                                flock, thus deprived of
One piece did not fall into place, however, and that was Tuscay, the            their best protectors,
became an  easy prey to
rchest pat of Italy. If Boniface could conquer Florence, Tuscay's most
their treacherous
powerful city, the region would be his. But Florence was a proud republic,
enemy.
ad would be hard to defeat. The pope had to play his cards skillflly.
FABLES,
Florence was divided by two riyal factons, the Blacks ad the Whites.            AESOP,
SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
The Whites were the merchant families  that had recently and  quickly
rsen to power ad wealth; the Blacks were the older money. Because of
teir popularity with the people, te Whites retained contol of the city, to
the Blacks' increasing resent                                                   ent. The feud between the two grew steadily
more bitter.
Here Boniface saw his chance: He would plot to help the Blacks take
over the city, and Florence would be in his pocket. And as he studied the
situation he bega to focus on one  ma, Dante Alighieri, the celebrated
writer, poet, ad ardent supporter of the Whites. Dante had aways been
interested in politics. He believed passionately in the republic, and ofen
chastised his fellow citizens for their lack of spine. He also happened to be
te city's most eloquent public speaker. In 1300, the yea Boniface bega
plotting to take over Tuscay, Dante's fellow citizens had voted him in to
Forence's highest elected positon, making hir one of the city's six pri­
ors. During his six-month term in the post, he had stood firmly against the
Blacks ad against al of the pope's attempts to sow disorder.
By 1301, however, Boniface had a new plan: He called in Charles de
Vaois, powerfl brother of the king of France, to help bring order to Tus­
cay. As Charles marched through norther Itay, and Florence seethed
wth                                                                             aiety and fear, Dante quickly emerged as the man who could rally
LAW 42                                                                          361

the people, arguing vehemently against appeasement and working desper­
ately to                                                                         a                                                                             the citizens and to organize resistance against the pope and
T W  L1 FF  OF
his puppet French prince. By hook or by crook, Boniface had to neutralize
1'1 1 F \1 ISTO( ; I ,ES
Dante. And so, even as on the one hand he threatened Florence with
[Themistocles :vl fellow
Charles de Valois, on the other he held out the olive branch, the possibil­
citizens reached the
point at which their                                                             ity of negotiations, hoping Dante would take the bait. And indeed the Flo­
jealousy made them                                                               rentines decided to send a delegation to Rome and try to negotiate a
listen to any slander at
peace. To   head the mission, predictably, they chose Dante.
his expense, and so
Some wamed the poet that the wily pope was setting up a trap to lure
[hel was forced to
remind the assembly of                                                           hir away, but Dante went to Rome anyway, arriving as the French army
his achievements until
stood before the gates of Florence. He feIt sure that his eloquence ad rea­
they could bear this no
son would win the pope over and save the city. Yet when the pope met the
longer. He once said to
poet and the Florentine delegates, he instatly intmidated them, as he did
those who were
complaining of him:                                                              so many. "Fall on your knees before me!" he bellowed at their first meet­
" Why are you tired of
ing. "Submit to met I tell you that in all tuth I have nothing in my heart
receiving benefts So
but to promote your peace." Succumbing to his powerfl presence, the
often from the same
men ? "  Besides this he                                                         Florentines listened as the pope promised to look after their interests. He
gave offense to the                                                              then advised them to retur hore, leaving one of their members behind
people when he built
to continue the talks. Boniface signaled that the man to stay was to be
the temple ofA rtemis,
Dante. He spoke with the utmost politeness, but in essence it was an order.
for not only did he
style the goddess                                                                And so Dante remained in Rome. And while he and the pope contn­
A rtemis A ristoboule, or                                                        ued their dialogue, Florence fell apart. With no one to rally the Whites,
A rtemis wisest in coun­
and with Charles de Valois using the pope's money to bribe and sow dis­
sel-with the hint that
sension, the Whites disintegrated, some arguing for negotiations, others
it was he who had
given the best counsel                                                           switching sides. Facing an enemy now divided and unsure of itself, the
to the A thenians and                                                            Blacks easily destroyed them within weeks, exacting violent revenge on
the Creeks-but he
them. And once the Blacks stood firmly in power, the pope finaly dis­
chose a sitefor it near
missed Dante fom Rome.
his own house at
Mehte                                                                            So at last the                                                                The Blacks ordered Dante to retur hore to face accusations and
                                                                                 A thenians banished                                                           stand trial. When the poet refsed, the Blacks condemned hir to be
him. They made use of
bured to death if he ever set foot in Florence again. And so Dante began
the ostracism to
a miserable life of exile, wandering through Italy, disgraced in the city that
humble his great repu­
tation and his author­                                                           he loved, never to retur to Florence, even after his death.
ity, as indeed was their
habit with any whose
Interpretation
power they regarded as
Boniface knew that if he only had a pretext to lure Dante away, Florence
oppressive, or who had
risen to an eminence                                                             would crumble. He played the oldest card in the book-threatening with
which they considered                                                            one hand while holding out the olive branch with the other-and Dante
out of keeping with (he
fell for it. Once the poet was in Rome, the pope kept hir there for as long
equality of a
as it took. For Boniface understood one of the principal precepts in the
democracy.
THE L1FE OF                                                                      game of power: One resolute person, one disobedient spirit, can tur a
THEMISTOCLES,                                                                    flock of sheep into a den of lions. So he isolated the troublemaker. With­
PLUTARCH,
c. A . D. 4 6- 1 20                                                              out the backbone of the city to keep them together, the sheep quickly
scattered.
                                                                                 Leam the lesson: Do not waste your tme lashing out in all directons
                                                                                 at what seems to be a many-headed enemy. Find the one head that mat-
362                                                                              LAW 4 2

ters-the person with willpower, or smarts, or, most important of all,
charisma. Whatever it costs you, lure this person away, for once he is ab­
sent his powers will lose their effect. His isolation can be physical (baish­
ment or absence from the court), political (narrowing his base of support),
or psychological (alienating hir from the group through slander and in­
sinuation). Cancer begins with a single cell; excise it before it spreads be­
yond cure.
KEYS TO POWER
In the past, an entire nation would be ruled by a king and his handful of
ministers. Only the elite had any power to play with. Over the centuries,
power has gradually become more and more diffsed and democratized.
This has created, however, a common misperception that groups no
longer have centers of power-that power is spread out and scattered
aong many people. Actually, however, power has changed in its num­
bers but not in its essence. There may be fewer mighty tyrants command­
ing the power of life and death over millions, but there remain thousads
of petty tyrants ruling smaller realms, and enforcing their will through in­
drect power games, charisma, and so on. In every group, power is con­
centrated in the hads of one or two people, for this is one area in which
human nature will never change: People will congregate around a single
strong personality like planets orbiting a sun.
To   labor under the illusion that this kind of power center no longer
exists is to make endless mistakes, waste energy and tme, ad never hit
the target. Powerfl people never waste time. Outwardly they may play
aong with the game-pretending that power is shared among many-but
inwardly they keep their eyes on the inevitable few in the group who hold
the cards. These are the ones they work on.                                     Wen troubles arise, they
look for the underlying cause, the single stong character who started the
strring and whose isolaton or banishment will settle the waters again.
In his family-therapy practce, Dr. Milton H. Erickson found that if
te family dynamic was unsetded and dysfunctional there was inevitably
one person who was the strrer, the toublemaer. In his sessions he would
sybolically isolate this rotten apple by seating hir or her apart fom the
others, if only by a few feet. Slowly the other family members would see
te physically sepaate person as the source of their difficulty. Once you
recognize who the stirrer is, pointng it out to other people will accomplish
a geat deal. Understanding who contols the group dynamic is a critical
realizaton. Remember: Stirrers thrive by hiding in the group, disguising
teir actons among the reactions of others. Render their actons visible
ad they lose their power to upset.
A key element in games of stategy is isolatng the enemy's power. In
cess you try to corer the king. In the Chinese game of go you try to iso­
late the enemy's forces in small pockets, rendering them immobile and in­
effectual.  It is  often  better to  isolate your enemies than  to  destroy
LAW 4 2                                                                         363

them-you seem less brutal. The result, though, is te same, for in te
game of power, isolation spells deat.
The most effectve form of isolation is somehow to separate your vic­
tims from their power base. When Mao Tse-tung wanted to eliminate a
enemy in the ruling elite, he did not confont the person directly; he
silently and steathily worked to isolate the man, divide his alies and tur
them away from hir, shrink his support. Soon the man would vanish on
his own.
Presence and appearance have great import in the game of power. To
seduce, particularly in the beginning stages, you need to be constantly
present, or create the feeling that you are; if you are often out of sight, te
charm will  wea  off.  Queen Elizabeth's prime  minister,  Robert Cecil,
had two main rivals: the queen's favorite, the Earl of Essex, and her for­
mer favorite, Sir Walter Raleigh. He  contrived to send them both on a
mission against Spain; with them away from the court he managed to
wrap his tentacles around the queen, seeure his position as  her top ad­
viser and weaen her affecton for Raleigh and the earl. The lesson here
is twofold: First, your absence from the court spells danger for you, and
you should never leave the scene in a time of turmoil, for your absence
can both symbolize and induce a loss of power; second, and on the oter
hand, luring your enemies away from the court at critica moments is a
great ploy.
Isolation has other strategie uses. When trying to seduce people, it is
often wise to isolate them fom teir usua social context. Once isolated
they are vulnerable to you, and your presence becomes magnified. Simi­
larly, con artists often look for ways to isolate their marks from their nor­
mal social milieux, steering them into  new environments in which tey
are no longer comfortable. Here they feel weak, and succumb to decep­
tion more easily. Isolation, then, can prove a power                             d way of bringing
people under your spell to seduce or swindle them.
You will ofen find powerfl people who have alienated themselves
from the group. Perhaps their power has gone to their heads, and they
consider themselves superior; perhaps they have lost the knack of com­
municating with ordinary folk. Remember: This makes them vulnerable.
Powernd though tey be, people like tis can be tumed to use.
The monk Rasputin gained his power over Czar Nicholas and Cza­
ina Alexandra of Russia through teir tremendous isolaton from the peo­
pIe.  Alexandra in partcular was  a foreigner,  and  especialy aienated
from everyday Russias; Rasputin used his peasant origins to insinuate
hirself into her good graces, for she desperately wanted to communicate
wit her subjects. Once in    the court's inner circle, Rasputn made hirself
indispensable and attained great power. Heading straight for the center,
he aimed for the one figure in Russia who commanded power (the czarina
dominated her husband) , and found he had no need to isolate her for te
work was already done. The Rasputin strategy can bring you great power:
Always  search  out people who hold high positons yet who  find them-
36                                                                               LAW 42

selves isolated on the board. They are like apples falling into your lap,
easily seduced, and able to catapult you into power yourself.
Finally, the reason you stike at the shepherd is because such an ac­
tion will dishearten the sheep beyond any rational measure. When Her­
nando Cortes and Francisco Pizarro led teir tiny forces against the Aztec
ad Incan empires, they did not make the mistake of fghting on several
fonts, nor were they intmidated by the numbers arrayed against them;
tey captured the kings,  Moctezuma and Atahualpa.  Vast empires fell
into their hands. With the leader gone the center of gravity is gone; there
is nothing to revolve around and everything falls apart. Aim at the lead­
ers, bring them down, and look for the endless opportunities in the confu­
sion that will ensue.
Image:  A  Flock  of  Fatted
Sheep.  Do  not  waste  precious
time trying to steal a sheep or two; do
not  risk  life  and  limb  by  setting  upon
the  dogs  that guard  the  flock. Aim at the
shepherd.   Lure   hir   away   and   the   dogs
will follow. Strike hir down and the flock will
scatter-you  can  pick  them  off one  by  one.
Authority:  If you  draw  a  bow,  draw  the
strongest.  If you use an arrow,  use the long­
est. To shoot a rider, first shoot his horse.
To       catch  a  gang  of bandits,  first  capture
its  leader. Just  as  a  country  has  its
border,  so the  killing of men has its limits.  If
the enemy's attack can be stopped [with a
blow to  the  headJ, why have any more dead
and   wounded   than   necessary?                                             (Chinese
poet Tu  Fu, Tang dynasty, eighth century)
LAW 42                                                                        365

REVERSAL
"Any harm you do to a man should be done in such a way that you need
not fear his revenge," writes Machiavelli. I you act to isolate your enemy,
mae sure he lacks te means to repay the favor. If you apply this Law, in
other words, apply it fom a positon of superiority, so that you have not­
ing to fear from his resentent.
Andrew Johnson, Abraham Lincoln's successor as V.S.  president,
saw Ulysses S. Grant as a troublesome member of his govemment. So he
isolated Grant, as a prelude to forcing                                       h        out. This only enraged te
great genera, however, who responded by forming a support base in the
Republican paty ad going on to become the next president. I would
have been far wiser to keep a ma like Grant in the fold, where he could
do less harm, than to mae him revengefl. And so you may ofen find it
better to keep people on your side, where you ca watch them, than to
risk creating an angry enemy. Keeping them dose, you can secredy whit­
de away at their support base, so that when the time comes to cut them
loose they will fal fast and hard without knowing what hit them.
366                                                                           LAW 42

LAW
43
WORK ON THE HEARTS
AND  MIND S O F  OTHERS
JUDGMENT
Coercion creates a reaetion that will eventually  work
against you.  You must seduee others into wanting to
move in your direction. A person you have sedueed be­
comes your loalpawn. And the way to seduee others is to
oerate on their individual psyehologes and weaknesses.
Sofen up the resistant by working on their emotions,
playing on what the hold dear and what the fear Ig­
nore the hearts and minds of others and the wil gow to
hate you.
.67

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Near the end of the reign of Louis XV, all of France seemed desperate for
chage, When the king's grandson and chosen successor, the future Louis
Thinking of the means
XVI, married the feen-year-old daughter of te empress of Austria, te
by which he could
French caught a glimpse of the fture tat seemed hopefl. The young
most effectively
persuade the Persians                                                        bride,  Marie-Antoinette,  was  beautifl  and  fH  of life.  She  instantly
to revolt, [Cyrus'sj                                                         changed the mood of te court, which was rank wit Louis XV's de­
deliberations led him to
baucheries; even the common people, who had yet to see her, talked excit­
adopt the following
edly of Marie-Antoinette. The French had grown disgusted with the series
plan, which he found
best suited to his                                                           of mistresses who had dominated Louis XV, and they looked forwad to
purpose. He wrote on a
serving their new queen. In 1773, when Marie-Antoinette publicly rode
roll ofparchment that
through the streets of Pais for the first tme, applauding crowds swamed
Astyages had
appointed him to                                                             around her cariage. "How fortunate," she wrote her mother, "to be in a
command the Persian                                                          position in which one can gain widespread aection at so litte cost."
army; then he                                                                In 1774 Louis XV died and Louis XVI took the trone. As soon as
summoned an assem­
Marie-Antoinette became queen she abadoned herself to the pleasures
bly of the Persians,
opened the roll in their                                                     she loved the most-                                                           rdering and weang te most expensive gowns and
presence a n d  read o u t                                                   jewelry in te  realm; sportng te  most elaborate  har in history, her
what he had written.
sculpted coifres rising as much as tree feet above her head; and trowing
"And now, he added,
a constat succession of masked balls and fetes. All of these whims she pad
I have an order for
you: every man is to                                                                                                                                       for on credit, never concering herself wit te cost or who paid the bills.
appear on parade with                                                                                                                                      Marie-Antoinette's greatest pleasure was the creaton and designing of
a billhook                                                                   "
a private Garden of Eden at the Pett Triaon, a chateau on te grounds of
The order was obeyed.
VersaHes with its own woods. The gardens at the Petit Trianon were to be
All the men assembled
with their billhooks,                                                        as "natural" as possible, including moss applied by hand to the trees and
and Cyrus's  next                                                            rocs. To heighten the pastora effect, the queen employed peasant milk­
command was that
maids to milk the finest-Iooking cows in the ream; launderers and cheese­
before the day was out
makers in special peasant outfits she helped design; shepherds to tend
they should dear a
certain piece of rough                                                       sheep with silk ribbons around teir necks. When she inspected the bars,
land full of thorn­                                                          she would watch her milkmaids squeezing milk into porcelain vases made
bushes, about eighteen
at the royal ceramic works. To    pass the time, Marie-Antoinette would
or twenty furlongs
gather flowers in the woods around the Petit Trianon, or watch her "good
square. This too was
done, whereupon Cyrus                                                        peasants" doing their "chores." The place became a separate world, its
issued the further order                                                     community limited to her chosen favorites.
that they should
With each new whim, the cost of maintaining the Petit Trianon soaed.
present themselves
Meanwhile, Frace itsel was deterioratng: There was famine and wide­
again on the following
day, after having taken                                                      spread discontent. Even socialy insulated courters seethed with resent­
a bath. Meanwhile,                                                           ment-the queen treated them like children. Only her favorites mattered,
Cyrus collected and
and tese were becoming fewer and fewer. But Marie-Antoinette did not
slaughtered all his
concer herself wit this. Not once troughout her reign did she read a
father's goats, sheep,
and oxen in preparation                                                      minister's report. Not once did she tour te provinces and rally the people
for entertaining the                                                         to her side. Not once did she mingle among the Parisians, or receive a del­
whole Persian army at
egaton from them. She did none of these things because as queen she feit
a banquet, together
the people owed her their afection, and she was not required to love tem
with the best wine and
bread he could procure.                                                      in retur.
The next day the guests
In 1784 the queen became embroied in a scada. As pat of an elabo­
assembled, and were
rate swindle, te most expensive diaond necklace in Europe had been
368                                                                          LAW 43

purchased under her name, ag during te swindlers' tial her lavish               told to si! down on the
grass and enjoy
lifestyle became public: People heard about the money she spent on jewels
themselves. After the
ad dresses and masked dances. They gave her the nicname "Madame
meal Cyrus asked them
Deficit," and fom then on she became the focus of the people's growing          which they preferred­
resentment. When she appeaed in her box at the opera the audience               yesterday 's work or
today's amusement;
geeted her with hisses. Even the court tured against her. For while she
and they replied that it
had been running up her huge expenditures, the country was headed for
was indeed a far cry
ruin.                                                                           from the previous day's
Five years later, in 1789, an unprecedented event took place: the be­           misery to their present
pleasures. This was the
ginning of the French Revoluton. The queen did not worry-Iet the peo­
answer which Cyrus
pIe have teir little rebellion, she seemed to think; it would soon quiet
wanted; he seized upon
down and she would be able to resure her life of pleaure. That year te          it at once and
proceeded to lay bare
people marched on Versailles, forcing the royal faily to quit the palace
what he had in mind.
ad take residence in Paris. This was a tiumph for the rebels, but it offered
"Men of Persia, " he
the queen an opportunity to hea the wounds she had opened ad establish          said, "listen to me: obey
contact with the people. The queen, however, had not leaed her lesson:          my orders, and you will
Not once would she leave the palace during her stay in Paris. Her subjects      be able to enjoy a thou­
                                                                                sand pleasures as good
could rot in heU for all she cared.
                                                                                as this wi!hout ever
In 1792 the royal couple was moved fom the palace to a prison, a the            turning your hands to
revolution officially declared the end of te monarchy. The following year       menial labor; but, if
you disobey, yester­
Louis XVI was tried, found guilty, and guillotined. As Maie-Antoinette
day 's  task will be the
awaited the same fate, hardly a soul came to her defense                        not one of her
pattern ofinnumerable
former friends in te court, not one of Europe's oter monarchs (who, as          others you will be
members of their own counties' royal fa                                         lies, had al te reason in te   forced to perform. Take
my advice and win
world to show that revoluton did not pay), not even her own family in
your freedom. I am the
Austria, including her brother, who now sat on the throne. She had be­
man destined to under­
come the world's paiah. In October of 1793, she finally knelt at the guillo­    take your liberation,
tine, unrepentant and defiant to the bitter end.                                and it is my belief that
you are a match for the
Medes in war as in
Interpretation
everything else. lt is the
From early on, Marie-Antoinette acquired the most dagerous of attitudes:        truth I tell you. Do not
As a young princess in Austia she was endlessly flattered ad cajoled. As        delay, butjing off the
yoke ofAstyages at
te fture queen of the French court she was the center of everyone's atten­
once. "
tion. She never leaed to charm or please other people, to become at­
The Persians had long
tned to teir individua psychologies. She never had to work to get her           resented their subjec­
way, to use calculation or cunning or the arts of persuasion. And like every­   tion to the Medes. A t
last they had found a
one who is indulged from a ealy age, she evolved into a monster of in­
leader, and welcomed
sensitvity.
with enthusiasm the
Marie-Antoinette became the focus of an entre country's dissatisfac­            prospect of liberty. .
ton because it is so infriating to meet with a person who makes no effort       On the present occasion
the Persians under
to seduce you or attempt to persuade you, even i only for te purpose of
Cyrus rose against the
deception. And do not imagine tat she represents a bygone era, or that
Medes and from then
she is even rae. Her type is today more common than ever. Such types live       onwards were masters
ofAsia.
i their own bubble-they seem to feel they are bor kings and queens,
THE HISTORIES,
ad that attention is owed them. They do not consider anyone else's na­
HERODOTUS,
tre, but bulldoze over people with the self-righteous arrogance of a Marie­     FIFTH CENTURY B.C ..
Antoinette. Pampered and indulged as children, as adults they still believe
                                                                                LAW 43                         369

that everything must come to them; convinced of teir own carm, they
make no effort to charm, seduce, or gently persuade.
'1                                                                                1 1 1':  C E "TL!':  A H'I
In the ream of power, such atttudes are disastous. At all times you
OF I'LHSI'ASIO\
must attend to those around you, gauging their partcular psycology, tai­
The north wind and the
loring your words to what you know will entice and seduce them. This re­
sun were disputing
which was the stronger,                                                           quires energy and art. The higher your station, the greater te need to
ami agreed to                                                                     remain attuned to the hearts and minds of those below you, creating a base
acknowledge as the
of support to mantain you at te pinnacle. Without that base, YOUf power
victor whichever of
will teeter, ad at the slightest change of fortune those below will gladly as­
them could strip a
traveler of his c!othing.                                                         sist in YOUf fall from grace.
The wind tried first.
But its violent gusts
only made the man
hold his c!othes tightly                                                          OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
around hir, and when                                                              In A.D. 225, Chuko Liang, master stategist and chief minister to the mler
it hlew harder still the                                                          of Shu in ancient China, confronted a dangerous situaton. The kingdom of
cold made hir so
                                                                                  Wei had mounted an all-out attack on Shu fom the nort. More dangerous
uncomfortahle that he
put on an extra wrap.                                                             still, Wei had formed an alliance with the barbarous states to the south of
Eventually the wind                                                               Shu, led by King Menghuo. Chuko Liang had to deal wit this second
got tired ofit and
menace from the south before he could hope to fend off Wei in the north.
handed hir over to the
As Chuko Liang prepared to march south against the barbarians, a
sun. The sun shone first
with a moderate                                                                   wise man in his camp offered hir advice. It would be impossible, this man
warmth, which made                                                                said, to pacif the region by force. Liang would probably beat Menghuo,
the man take off his
but as soon as he headed north again to deal with Wei, Menghuo would
topcoat. Then it hlazed
reinvade. "It is better to win hearts," said the wise man, "than cities; better
fiercely, till, unable
to stand the heat,                                                                to battle with heats than with weapons. I hope you will succeed in winning
he stripped ami went                                                              the hearts of these people." "You read my thoughts," responded Chuko
off to bathe in a
Liang.
nearhy river.
As Liang expected, Menghuo launched a power                                       attack. But Liang
Persuasion i\' more
effective than force.                                                             laid a tap and managed to capture a large pat of Menghuo's army, includ­
FAlLES,                                                                           ing the king hirself. Instead of punishing or executing his prisoners, how­
AESOP,
ever, he separated the soldiers fom their king, had their shacles removed,
SIXTH CENTURY H.r.
regaled them with food and wine, and then addressed them. "You are al
upright men," he said. "I believe you all have paents, wives, and cildren
waiting for you at hore. They are doubtless shedding bitter tears at your
fate. I am going to release you, so that you can retur hore to YOUf loved
ones and comfort them." The men thanked Liang with tears in their eyes;
then he sent for Menghuo. "If I release you," asked Liang, "what will you
do?" "I will pull my army together again," answered the king, "and lead it
against you to a decisive battle. But if you capture me a second time, I will
bow to your superiority." Not only did Liang order Menghuo released, he
gave hir a gift of a horse ad saddle. When angry lieutenants wondered
why he did this, Liang told them, "I can capture that man as easily as I ca
take something out of my pocket. I                                                a                                                                             trying to win his heart. When I do,
peace will come of itself here in the south."
As Menghuo had said he would, he attacked again. But his own off­
cers, whom Liang had teated so weIl, rebelIed against hir, captured hir,
and tured hir over to Liang, who asked hir again the same question                a
370                                                                               LAW 43

before. Menghuo replied that he had not been beaten fairly, but merely be­
tayed by his own officers; he would fight again, but i captured a third tme
The men who have
he would bow to Liang's superiority.
changed the universe
                                                                                Over the following months Liang outwitted Menghuo again and again,                                                have never gotten there
capturing hir a third, a fourth, and a                                          f                                                                         tme. On each occasion Meng­             by w(Jrking on leaders,
but rather by moving
huo's troops grew more dissatisfied. Liang had treated them with respect;
the masses. Working on
tey had lost their heart for fightng. But every tme Chuko Liang asked
leaders is the method of
                                                                                Menghuo to yield, the great king would come up with another excuse: You   intrigue and only leads
                                                                                ticked me, 1 lost through bad luck, on and on. If you capture me again,   to secondary results.
                                                                                                                                                          Working on the masses,
                                                                                he would promise, 1 swear 1 will not betay you. And so Liang would let
                                                                                                                                                          however, is the strake
him go.                                                                                                                                                   ofgenius that changes
                                                                                When he captured Menghuo for the sixth time, he asked the king the        the face of the world.
sa                                                                              e question again. "If you capture me a sevent tme," the king replied,     NAPOLEON BONAPARTE,
1 769- 1 82 1
"I shall give you  my  loyalty and never rebel  again." "Very weIl,"  said
Liang. "But if I capture you again, 1 will not release you."
Now Menghuo and his soldiers fled to a far corer of their kingdom,
te region of Wuge. Defeated so may tmes, Menghuo had only one hope
lef: He would ask the help of King Wutugu of Wuge, who had an immense
ad ferocious army.  Wutugu's warriors wore an armor of tghtly woven
vines   soaked   in   oil,   then   dried   to   an   impenetable   hardness.   Wth                                                                       LFI·: 0] \LE\.\  IlI':H
Menghuo at his side, Wutugu marched this mighty army against Liang, and         '1' 1 1 1':                                                               (;HI':.I
tis time the great strategist seemed fightened, leading his men in a hur­                                                                                 This long and painfal
pars/lit ofDarius-for
ried reteat. But he was merely leading Wutugu into a tap : He corered
in eleven days he
the king's men in a narrow valley, then lit fires set al around them. When
marched 33 hundred
the fires reached the soldiers Wutugu's whole army burst into flame-the         furlongs-harassed his
oil in their armor, of course, being highly flammable. All of them perished.    soldiers so that most of
them were ready to give
Liang had managed to separate Menghuo and his entourage fom the
iI up, chiejy for want
ca                                                                              age in the valley, and the king found hirself a captve for the seventh
of water. While they
tme. Afer this slaughter Liag could not bear to face his prisoner agan.         were in this distress, ir
He sent a messenger to the captured king: "He has commissioned me to re­        happened that some
Macedonians who had
lease you. Mobilize another army against hir, if you can, and ty once
fetched water in skins
more to defeat hir." Sobbing, the king fell to the ground, crawled to Liang
upon their mules from
on his hads and knees, and prostated hirself at his feet. "Oh great minis­      a river they had found
ter," cried Menghuo, "yours is the majesty of Heaven. We men of the south       out came about noon
to the place where
will never again offer resistance to your rule." "Do you now yield?" asked
A lexander was, and
Lang. "I, my sons, and my grandsons are deeply moved by Your Honor's
seeing him almost
boundless, life-giving mercy. How could we not yield?"                          cllOked wilh thirst,
Liang honored Menghuo with a great banquet, reestablished hir on                presently jlled a heimet
and offered it him
te throne, restored his conquered lands to his rule, then ret                   ed north
Then he took the
wit his amy, leaving no occupying force. Liang never came bac-he had
heimet into his hands,
no need to: Menghuo had become his most devoted ad unshakable ally.             and h)king round
about, when he saw all
those who were near
Interpretation
him stretching their
Chuko Liang had two optons: Try to defeat the barbarians i the south
heads out and looking
                                                                                wth one crushing blow, or patently and slowly win them to his side over                                           earnestly after the
te. Most people more powe                                                       r                                                                         than their enemy grab the first opton   drink, he returned it
                                                                                                                                                                                                  again wirh thanks
                                                                                ad never consider the second, but the truly powerfl think fa ahead: The
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAW 43                    371

without tasting a                                                               first opton may be quick ad easy, but over time it brews ugly emotions in
drop of it.
the heats of te vaquished. Their resentent turs to hated; suc ani­
"For, " said he, "if I
mosity keeps you on edge-you spend your energy protectng what you
alone should drink, the
rest will be out of                                                             have gained, growing paraoid and defensive. The second opton, though
heart. " The soldiers no                                                        more difficult, not only brings you peace of mind, it converts a potental
sooner took notice of
enemy into a pilla of support.
his temperance and
In all your encounters, tae a step bac-take the tme to caculate ad
magnanimity upon this
occasion, but they one                                                          attune yourself to your targets' emotional makeup ad psychological weak­
and all cried out to him                                                        nesses. Force will only strengten their resistace. With most people the
to lead them forward
heart is te key: They are like cildren, ruled by their emotons. To   sofen
boldly, and began
them up, alterate harshness wit mercy. Play on teir basic fears, and also
whipping on their
horses. For whilst they                                                         teir loves-freedom, faily, etc. Once you break them down, you will
had such a king they                                                            have a lifelong friend ad fiercely loya ally.
said they defied both
weariness and thirst,
and lookeIl upon them­                                                          Govenments saw men only in mass; but our men, being irregulars, were not
selves to be little less                                                        formations, but individuals                                                 Our kingdoms lay in each man 's mind.
than immorral.                                                                  Seven Pillars of Wisdom, T E. Lawrence, 1888-1 935
THE LlFE OE
ALIXANDER 'fIE CiKEAT,
PLLJTARCH.
c. A.D. 46- 1 20
KEYS TO POWER
I the game ofpower, you ae surrounded by people who have absolutely
no reason t help you unless it is in teir interest to do so. And if you have
nothing to offer their self-interest, you are likely to make tem hostile, for
they will see in you just one more competitor, one more waster of teir
tme. Those that overcome this prevaling coldness are the ones who find
the key that unlocks te stanger's heart ad mind, seducing                       h                                                                           into teir
corer, if necessary sofening                                                    h                                                                           up for a punch. But most people never
leam tis side of te game. When tey meet someone new, rater tha
stepping back and probing t see what maes tis person unique, they               t
about themselves, eager to ipose teir own willpower ad prejudices.
They argue, boast, ad make a show of teir power. They may not know it
but they are secretly creating an enemy, a resister, because tere is no
more infriating feeling than having your individualit ignored, your own
psychology unacknowledged. It makes you feel lifeless and resentfl.
Remember: The key to persuasion is softening people up and break­
ing tem down, gently. Seduce tem wit a to-pronged approach: Work
on their emotons and play on teir intellectual weaknesses. Be alert to
both what separates them fom everyone else (their individual psycology)
and what tey share with everyone else (their basic emotonal responses).
Aim at the primary emotions-Iove, hate, jealousy. Once you move teir
emotions you have reduced their contol, making them more vulnerable to
persuasion.
When Chuko Liang wanted to dissuade an importat general of a rival
kingdom fom entering into a alliace wit Ts'ao Ts'ao, Liang's dreaded
enemy, he did not detal Ts'ao Ts'ao's cruelty, or attack him on mora
grounds. Instead Lang suggested that Ts'ao Ts'ao was realy aer the gen-
372                                                                             LAW                                                                         43

eral's beautfl young wife. This hit the genera in the gut, and won hir
over.  Mao Tse-tung similaly always appealed to popular emotions, and
spoke   in   the   simplest  terms.   Educated  and   well-read   hirself,   in   his
speeches he used viscera metaphors, voicing the public's deepest anxeties
and encouraging them to vent teir fustratons in public meetngs. Rater
than arguing the practcal aspects of a partcula program, he would de­
scribe how it would affect them on the most primitve, down-to-earth level.
Do not believe that this approach works only with the illiterate and un­
schooled-it works on one and all. All of us are mortal ad face the same
dreadfl fate, and all of us shae the desire for attachment and belonging.
Str up these emotons ad you captvate our hearts.
The best way to do this is with a dramatc jolt, of the kind that Chuko
Liang created when he fed and released prisoners who expected only the
worst from him. Shaking them to the core, he sofened their hearts. Play on
contasts like this: Push people to despair, ten give them relief. If they ex­
pect pain and you give tem pleasure, you win their heats. Creating plea­
sure of any kind, in fact, will usually bring you success, as will allaying fears
and providing or promising security.
Symbolic gestures are ofen enough to win sympaty ad goodwill. A
gesture  of self-sacrifice,  for  example-a  show  that  you  suffer  as  those
around you do                                                                           will make people identif with you, even if your suffering
is symbolic or minor and theirs is real.  When you enter a group, make a
gesture of goodwill; sofen the group up for the harsher actons that will fol­
low later.
When T E. Lawrence was fightng the Turks in te deserts of the Mid­
de East during World War  I, he had an epiphany: It seemed to hir that
conventonal warfae had lost its value. The old-fashioned soldier was lost
in the enormous armies of the time, in which he was ordered about like a
lifeless pawn. Lawrence wated to tur this aound. For hir, every sol­
dier's mind was a kingdom he had to conquer. A committed, psychologi­
cally  motvated  soldier would fight harder  ad  more  creatively tha  a
puppet.
Lawrence's percepton is still more tue in the world today, where so
may of us feel alienated, anonymous, and suspicious of authority, all of
which makes overt power plays and force even more counterproductive
ad dagerous. Instead of manipulating lifeless pawns, make tose on your
side  convinced and excited by te cause you have enlisted them in; this
will not only make your work easier but it will also give you more leeway
to deceive them later on. And to accomplish tis you need to deal with
their individua psychologies. Never  clumsily assure that the tactc tat
worked on one person will necessaily work on another. To    find the key
tat will motivate them, first get them to open up. The more they talk, te
more they reveal about their likes and dislikes-the handles and levers to
move them with.
The  quickest way to  secure  people's minds is by demonstratng,  as
simply  as  possible, how an  acton  will  benefit them.  Self-interest is the
LAW                                                                                     43                                                          373

strongest motive o f a: A great cause may captue minds, but once t e  first
flush of excitement is over, interest will flag-unless there is someting to
be gained. Self-interest is the solider foundaton. The causes that work best
use a noble veneer to cover a blatant appea to self-interest; the cause se­
duces but the self-interest secures the deal.
The  people  who are best  at appealing to  people's minds  ae ofen
artists, intellectuas,  and  tose  of a more poetic nature. This is because
ideas are most easily communicated through metaphors and imagery. It is
always good policy, ten, to have in your pocket at least one artst or intel­
lectual who can appeal concretely to people's minds.  Kings have aways
kept a stable of writers in teir bam: Frederick the Great had his Voltaire
(untl they  quarreled and separated) , Napoleon won  over  Goethe.  Con­
versely, Napoleon III's alienaton of writers such as Victor Hugo, whom he
exiled from France, contibuted to his growing unpopularity ad eventual
downfall. It is dangerous, then, to alienate those who have powers of ex­
pression, and usefl to pacif and exploit tem.
Finally, leam to play the numbers game. The wider your support base
the  stonger  your power.  Understanding  that  one  alienated,  disaffected
soul can spak a blaze of discontent, Louis XIV made sure to endear him­
self to te lowest members of his sta. You too must constatly win over
more allies on all ievels-a tme will inevitably come when you will need
them.
Image:
The Keyhole.
People  build
walls to keep you
out;   never   force
YOUf way in - you
will find only more
walls  within  walls.
There  are  doors  in
these walls, doors to
te heat and mind, ad
they  have  tiny  key­
holes. Peer                                                                    tough the
keyhole, find  the key
that opens te dOOf,
and you have access
to their will with
no  ugly signs
of  forced
e n t r y.
374                                                                            LAW 43

Authority: The difficulties in the way of persuasion lie in my know­
ing the heart of the persuaded in order thereby to fit my wording
into it                                                                For this reason, whoever attempts persuasion before
the throne, must carefully observe the sovereign's feelings of love
and hate,  his secret wishes  and fears,  before he can conquer
his  heart.                                                            (Han-fei-tzu,  Chinese  philosopher, third  century B.C.)
REVERSAL
There is no possible reversa to this Law.
LAW 4 3                                                                375

LAW
44
DISARM AND INFURIATE
WITH THE MIRROR E F FECT
JUDGMENT
The miror reects reality, hut it is also the perfect toolfor
decetion: len you miror your enemies, doing exactly
as the do, the cannotfigure out your strateg. The Mir­
ror Effect mocks and humiliates them, making them over­
react. By holding up a mirror to their psyches, you seduce
them with the illusion that you share their values; b
holding up a miror to their actions, you teach them a
lsson. Fe  can resist the power of the Miror Effect.
376

MIRROR EFFECTS: Preliminary Typology
Mirrors have the power to disturb uso Gazing at our reflection in the mir­
TIE MERCII ,\r' ilD
ror, we most ofen see what we want to see-te image of ourselves with
HIS FHIE'D
which we are most comfortable. We   tend not to look too closely, ignoring
A certain merchant
te wrinkles and blemishes. But if we do look hard at te reflected image,
once had a great desire
we sometimes feel that we are seeing ourselves as others see us, as a person    to make a long journey.
among other people, a object rather than a subject. That feeling maes us        Now in regard that he
was not very wealthy,
shudder-we  see  ourselves,  but  fom  te  outside,  minus  the  toughts,
"It is requisite. " said he
spirit, and soul tat fill our consciousness. We   are a thing.
to hirself "that before
In using Mirror Effects we symbolically re-create tis distrbing power           my departure I should
leave some part ofmy
by mirroring te actions of other people, mimicking their movements to
estate in the city. to the
unsetle ad infriate tem. Made to feel moced, cloned, objectike, an
end that if I meet with
image without a soul, tey get angry. Or do the same thing slightly differ­
ili luck in my travel;
enty  and  they  might  feel disarmed-you  have  perfectly  reflected their     I may have wherewithal
to keep me at my
wishes and desires. This is the narcissistc power of mirrors. In either case,
return " To   this purpose
te Mirror Effect unsetles your tagets, whether agering or entacing
he delivered a great
them,  and in that instant you have  the  power to  manipulate  or seduce       number of bars of iron,
them. The  Effect contains great power because it operates on the most          which were a principal
part ofhis wealth, in
primitive emotions.
trust to one of his
There are four main Mirror Effects in te realm of power:
friends, desiring hir to
keep them during his
Te   Neut                                                                       ang                                                                       E                             ect  In  acient  Greek  mythology,   te   Gorgon   absence; and then,
ta king his leave, away
Medusa had serpents for har, protuding tongue, massive teeth, and a face
he went. Some time
so ugly that ayone who gaed at her was                                          ted into stone, out of fright.
after, having had but ill
But the  hero  Perseus managed to  slay Medusa by polishing his bronze          luck in his traveis, he
shield into a miror, ten using the reflecton in the mirror to guide hir as      returned hore; and the
first thing he did was to
he crept up ad cut off her head without looking at her directly.  If the
go to his friend, and
shield in this instance was a mirror, the mirror also was a kind of shield:
demand his iron: but
Medusa could not see Perseus, she saw only her own reflected actions, and       his friend, who owed
behind this screen the hero stole up and destoyed her.                          several sums ofmoney,
having sold the iron to
This is te essence of the Neutalizing Effect: Do what your enemies
pay his own debts,
do, following teir actons as best you can, ad they cannot see what you
made hir this ans wer,'
are up to                                                                       tey are blinded by your mirror. Their stategy for dealing with            " Truly, friend, " said he,
                                                                                you depends on your reactng to them in a way caracteristic of you; neu­   "I put your iron into a
room that was close
traize it by playing a ga                                                       e of mimicry with them. The tactic has a mock­
locked, imagining it
ing, even infriatng effect. Most of us remember te childhood experience
would have been there
of someone teaing us by repeatng our words exactly-afer a while, usu­           as secure as my own
ally not long, we wanted to punch them in the face. Working more subtly         gold; but an accident
has happened which
as an adult, you can stll unsettle your opponents tis way; shielding your
no one could have
own stategy wit the mirror, you lay invisible taps, or push your oppo­
suspected, for there was
nents into the tap tey planned for you.                                         a rat in the room which
This powerfl technique has been used in militay stategy since the               ate it all up. "
The merchant,
days of Sun-tzu; in our own tme it ofen appears in politcal ca                  paigning.
pretending ignorance,
It is aso usefl for disguising those situatons in whic you have no particu­
replied, "It is a terrible
lar stategy yourself. This is the Warrior's Mirror.                             misfortune to me
                                                                                indeed; but I know of
A  reverse  version  of the  Neutralizing  Effect  is  te   Shadow:   You
                                                                                LAW 44                                                                    377

old that rats love iron                                                         shadow your opponents' every move without their seeing you. Use the
extremely; I have
Shadow to gather informaton that will neutralize their strategy later on,
suffered b y  them many
when you will be able to thwart their every move. The Shadow is effectve
times before in the same
manner, amI therefore                                                           because to follow the movements of others is to gain valuable insights into
can the better bear my                                                          their habits and routnes. The Shadow is te preeminent device for detec­
present ajiction. "
tives and spies.
This answer extremely
pleased the friend, who
was glad to hear the                                                            T                                                                                e Narcissus Effect  Gazing at an image in the waters of a pond, the
merchant so weil                                                                                                                                                 Greek youth Narcissus fell in love with it. And when he found out that the
inclined to believe that
image was his own reflection, and that he therefore could not consummate
a rat had eaten his iron;
his love, he despaired and drowned hirself. All of us have a similar prob­
and to rem(JVe all
suspicions, desired him                                                         lem: We   are profoundly in love with ourselves, but since this love excludes
to dine with him the
a love object outside ourselves, it remains contnuously unsatisfied and un­
next day. The merchant
flfilled. The Narcissus Effect plays on this universal narcissism: You look
promised he would, but
in the meantime he met                                                          deep into the souls of other people; fathom their inmost desires, their val­
in the middle of the city                                                       ues, their tastes, their spirit; and you reflect it back to them, making your­
one of his friend's chU-                                                        self into a kind of mirror image. Your ability to reflect their psyche gives
(Iren; the child he
you great power over them; they may even feel a tnge of love.
carried home, and
locked up in a room.                                                            This is simply the ability to mimic another person not physically, but
The next day he went to                                                         psychologically, and it is immensely powerfl because it plays upon the
his friend, who seemed
unsatisfied self-Iove of a child. Normally, people bombard us with their ex­
to be in greal ajiction,
periences,  their tastes. They hardly ever make the effort to see things
which he asked him the
cause 0[, as if he had                                                          through our eyes. This is annoying, but it also creates great opportunity: If
been perfectly ignorant                                                         you can show you understad another person by reflecting their inmost
of what had happened.
feelings, they will be entanced and disarmed, al the more so because it
"0, my dear friend, "
happens so rarely. No one can resist this feeling of being harmoniously re­
answered the other, "/
beg you 10 excuse me, if                                                        flected in the outside world, even though you might weH be manufacturing
you do not see me so                                                            it for their benefit, and for deceptive purposes of your own.
cheerful as otherwise
The Narcissus Effect works wonders in both social life and business; it
I would be; I have lost
gives us both the Seducer's and the Courtier's Mirror.
one of my chi/dren;
I have had him cried by
sOl/nd of trumpet, but                                                          T                                                                                e Moral Effect  The power of verbal argument is extremely limited,
I know not what is
ad often accomplishes the opposite of what is intended. As Graciän re­
become ofhim. "
marks, "The truth is generally seen, rarely heard." The Moral Effect is a
"O!" replied the
merchant, "/ am grieved                                                         perfect way to demonstrate your ideas through action. Quite simply, you
10 hear this; jär                                                               teach others a lesson by giving them a taste of their own medicine.
yesterday in the
In the Moral Effect, you mirror what other people have done to you,
evening, as I parted
and do so i a way that makes them realize you ae doing to them exactly
from hence, I saw an
owl in the air with a                                                           what they did to you. You make them feZ that their behavior has been un­
child in his claws; bI/I                                                        pleasant, as opposed to hearing you complain ad whine about it, whic
whether it were yours
only gets their defenses up. And as they feel the result of their actions rr­
I cannot lell. "
rored back at them, they realize in the profoundest sense how they hurt or
" Why, you mOSI foolish
and absurd creature!"                                                           punish others with their unsocia behavior. You objectfy the qualites you
replied the friend, "are
want them to feel ashamed of and create a mirror in whic they can gaze at
YOI/ not aS'hamed 10 lell
their follies and leam a lesson about themselves. This technique is ofen
such an egregious lie?
An owl, thaI weighs at                                                          used by educators, psychologists, and anyone who has to deal wit un-
378                                                                             LAW 44

pleasant and unconscious behavior. This is the Teacher's Mirror. Whether        most not above two or
three pounds, can he
or not there is actually ayting wrong with the way people have teated
carry a boy that weighs
you, however, it can ofen be to your advantage to reflect it back to them in
above fifty? "
a way that makes them feel guilty about it.                                     " Why, " replied the
merchant, "do you
make such a wonder at
Te Hallucnator Effect  Mirrors are tremendously deceptive, for they
that? As ifin a country
create a sense that you are looking at the real world. Actually, though, you
where one rat can eat a
are only staring at a piece of glass, which, as everyone knows, cannot show     hundred tons ' weight
te world exactly as it is: Everything in a mirror is reversed. When Alice       o[ iron, it were such a
                                                                                wonder for an owl to
goes through the looking glass in Lewis Carroll's book, she enters a world
                                                                                carry a ehild that
tat is back-to-font, and more than just visually.                               weighs not overfifty
The Hallucinatory Effect comes from creating a perfect copy of a ob­            pounds in aW" The
ject, a place, a person. This copy acts as a kind of dummy-people tae it        friend, upon this, found
that the mercharll was
for  the real thing, because it has the physical appearance of the real ting.
no such fool as he took
This is the preeminent technique of con                                         asts, who stategically mimic the
him to be, begged his
real  world to deceive you. It also has applications in any arena that re­      pardon for the cheat
whieh he designed to
quires camouflage. This is the Deceiver's Mirror.
have put upon him,
restored him the value
of his iron, and so had
OBSERVANCES OF MIRROR EFFECTS                                                   his son again.
                                                                                FAHl.ES,
                                                                                PILPAY,
Observance I                                                                    INDlA,
In February of 1815, the emperor Napoleon escaped fom the islad of              FOURTH CFNTlJRY
Elba, where he had been imprisoned by the allied forces of Europe, and re­
ted to Paris in a march that stirred the French nation, rallying toops
and citzens of all classes to his side and chasing his successor, King Louis
XVIII, off the throne. By March, however, having reestablished hirself in
When you have come
power, he had to face the fact that France's situaton had gravely changed.
to grips and are striv­
The country was devastated, he had no allies among te other European
ing together with the
nations, and his most loyal and important ministers had deserted hir or         enemy, and you realize
that you cannot
lef the country.  Only one man remained from the old regime-Joseph
advanee, you "soak in "
Fouche, his former minister of police.
and become one with
Napoleon had relied on Fouche to do his dirty work throughout his               the enemy. You can win
previous reign, but he had never been able to figure his minister out. He       hy applying a suitable
technique while you
kept a corps of agents to spy on al of his ministers, so that he would aways
are mutually entangled.
have an edge on them, but no one had gotten anyting on Fouche. If sus­
. . . Y ou can win often
pected of some                                                                  rsdeed, the minister would not get angry or take the accu­            decisively with the
sation   personaly-he   would   submit,   nod,   sr                             le,   ad  chage   colors                                              advantage of knowing
how to "soak" into the
cha                                                                             eleonlike, adaptng to the requirements of the moment. At first this
enemy, whereas, were
had seemed somewhat pleasat and charming, but afer a while it fus­
you to draw apart, you
tated Napoleon, who feit outdone by this slippery man. At one tme or an­        would lose the chance
oter he had fired all of his most important ministers, including Talleyrand,    to win.
hut he never touched Fouche. And so, in 1815, back in power and in need         A BOOK OF FIVE RINGS,
                                                                                MIYAMOTO MUSASHl,
of help, he feit he had no coice but to reappoint Fouche as his minister of
                                                                                JAPAN,
police.                                                                         SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
Several weeks into his new reign, Napoleon's spies told him they be-
LAW 44                                                                          379

lieved Fouche was i n  secret contact with ministers o f  foreign counties, in­
cluding Metterich of Austria.                                                     M                                                                             raid that his most valuable minister was
'1'1 1 1<:  F()\                                                                  ,1 , 1 )
betraying hir to his enemies, Napoleon had to find out the                        tth before it
TIIE ,TOIlK
was too late. He could not confront Fouche  directly-in person the man
One day Mr, Fox
was as slippery as an eel. He needed hard proof.
decided tu fork Ol/t
And invite old Mrs.                                                               This seemed to come i April, when te emperor's private police cap­
Sturk Ol/t<                                                                       tured a Viennese gentleman who had come to Paris to pass informaton on
The dinner wasn 't
to Fouche. Ordering the ma brought before hir, Napoleon treatened to
elaborate­
shoot hir then and there unless he confessed; the  man broke down and
Being habitl/ally mean,
He didn't go in for                                                               admitted he had given Fouche a letter fom Metterich, written in invisible
haute cuhine-                                                                     ink, arranging for a secret meeting of special agents i Basel. Napoleon ac­
In fact it consisted of a
                                                                                  cordingly ordered one of his own agents to infiltate this meetng. If Fouche
shallow plate
Of thin grl/el.                                                                   was indeed planning to betay hir, he would finally be caught red-handed
Within a minI/te                                                                  and would hag.
Ol/r juker had lapped
Napoleon waited impatently for the agent's retur, but to bis bewil­
his plate clean;
derment the agent showed up days later reportng that he had head noth­
Meanwhile his gl/est,
ing that would implicate Fouche in a conspiracy. In fact it seemed tat the
fishing away with
her beak,                                                                         oter  agents present suspected Fouche  of double-crossing ther, as  if he
Got not a morsei in it.
were working for Napoleon all along. Napoleon did not believe this for an
To  pay him back jiJr
instant-Fouche had somehow outwitted hir agan.
this cruel Practical
juke, the slork invited                                                           The following moring Fouche visited Napoleon, and remarked, "By
The fox to dinner the                                                             the way,  sire, I never told  you  tat I had a letter fom  Metterich a few
following week.
days  ago; my mind was  so  fll  of things of greater moment. Besides, his
"I shol/ld be
emissary omitted to give me the powder needed to make te writng legi­
delighled. "
He replied;                                                                       ble                                                                           Here at length is the letter." Sure that Fouche was toying wit hir,
" When it comes to                                                                                                                                              Napoleon  exploded,  "You  are  a  traitor,  Fouche!  I  ought  to  have  you
friends I never stand
hanged." He contnued to harague Fouche, but could not fire hir witout
upon pride. "
proof. Fouche only expressed                                                      aazement at te emperor's words, but in­
Punctually on the
day he ran                                                                        wardly he smiled, for all along he had been playing a mirroring game.
To   his hostess 's  house                                                        Interpretation
and at onee began
Fouche had known for yeas that Napoleon kept on top of those around
Praising everything:
hir by spying on them day and night. The minister had survived this game
" Whal taste! What chiel
And Ihe food-done                                                                 by having his own spies spy on Napoleon's spies, thus neutalizing any ac­
jusl to a tur!"                                                                   tion Napoleon might take against hir. In the case of the meetng in Basel,
Then sat down wilh a
he even tured the tables: Knowing about Napoleon's double agent, he set
hearty appetite
it up so that it would appear as if Fouche were a loyal double agent too.
(Foxes are always
ready to eal)                                                                     Fouche gained power and flourished in a period of great tumult by
And savored the deli­                                                             mirroring those aound hir. During the French Revoluton he wa a radi­
cious smeil ofmeal.
cal Jacobin; after the Terror he beca                                             e a moderate republican; ad under
It was minced meat and
Napoleon he became a committed imperialist whom Napoleon ennobled
served-Io serve
him right!­                                                                       and made the duke of Otranto. If Napoleon took up the weapon of digging
In a long-necked.                                                                 up dr on people, Fouche made sure he had the dr on Napoleon, as weIl
narrow-mouthed um.
as on everyone else. This also alowed hir to predict te emperor's plans
The "lork. easily
ad desires, so that he could echo his boss's sentments before he had even
stooping.
                                                                                  Enjoyed her fill                                                              uttered them. Shielding his actons with a mirror stategy, Fouche could
                                                                                  With her long bill;                                                           also plot offensive moves without being caught i te act.
                                                                                  His snout, Ihollgh,
                                                                                                                                                                This is the power of mirroring those aound you. First, you give people
380                                                                               LAW 44

the feeling that you share their thoughts and goas. Scond, if they suspect       heinfi the wronfi
shape ami size,
you have ulterior motives, the mirror shields you fom them, preventing
He had to return to
them from figuring out your strategy. Eventually this will infriate and un­
his den
settle them. By playing the double, you steal their thunder, suck away their     Empty·hellied, tai!
initative, make them feel helpless. You aso gain te ability to choose when       drafifiinfi, ears
drooping,
ad how to unsettle them-another avenue to power. And the mirror saves
As red in the face as a
you  mental  energy:  simply echoing the  moves  of others gives you the
fox who 's been caufiht
space you need to develop a strategy of your own.                                by a hen.
SELECTEf FAHLES,
JEAN DE LA FONTAINF,
1 621 - 1 695
Observance 11
Early o n  i n  his career, the ambitous statesman and general Alcibiades of
Athens  (450-404 B.C.) fashioned a formidable weapon that became the
source of his power. In every encounter with others, he would sense their
moods and tastes, then careflly tailor his words and actons to mirror teir
inmost desires. He would seduce them with the idea that their values were
'1' 1 1 1'.                                                                      1'1·HI.()I                 f:/)
superior to everyone else's, and that his goa was to model hirself on them
U:Tn: H
or help them realize their dreams. Few could resist his charm.
When I wish to find out
The first man to fall under his speIl was the philosopher Socrates. Al­
how wise, or how
cibiades represented the opposite of the Socratic idea of simplicity and up­
stupid, or how fiood, or
rightess: He lived lavishly and was completely unprincipled. Whenever            how wicked is any one,
he met Socrates, however, he mirrored the older man's sobriety, eatng            or what are his
thoufihts at the
simply, accompanying Socrates on long walks, and talking only of philoso­
moment, I fashion the
phy and virtue. Socrates was not completely fooled-he was not unaware
expression ofmy face,
of Alcibiades' other life. But that only made hir vulnerable to a logic that     as accurately as possi­
ble, in accordance with
flattered hir: Only in my presence, he feIt, does this ma submit to a virtu­
the expression oIhis,
ous influence; only I have such power over hir. This feeling intoxicated
and then wait to see
Socrates, who became Alcibiades' fervent admirer and supporter, one day.         what thoufihts or senti­
even risking his own life to rescue the young man in battle.                     ments arise in my miml
The Athenias considered Alcibiades their greatest orator, for he had             or heart, as if to match
or correspond with the
a uncanny ability to tune in to his audience's aspiratons, and mirror their
expression.
desires. He made his greatest speeces in support of the invasion of Sicily,
EDGAR ALLAN POE,
which he thought would bring great wealt to Athens ad limitless glory to         1809-1 849
hirself. The speeches gave expression to young Athenians' thirst to con­
quer lands for themselves, rather tan living off the victories of their ances­
tors. But he also tailored his words to reflect older men's nostagia for the
glory years when Athens led the Greeks against Persia, and ten went on to
create an empire. All Athens now dreamed of conquering Sicily; Alcibi­
ades' plan was approved, and he was made the expedition's commader.
While Alcibiades was leading te invasion of Sicily, however, certain
Athenians fabricated charges against hir of profaning sacred statues. He
kew his enemies would have hir executed if he retumed hore, so at the
last minute he deserted the Athenian fleet and defected to Athens's bitter
enemy,  Sparta.  The Spartans welcomed this great man to their side, but
tey knew his reputaton and were way of hir. Alcibiades loved luxury;
te Spartans were a warrior people who worshipped austerity, ad they
were afraid he would corrupt their youth. But much to their relief, the AI-
LAW 44                                                                           381

cibiades who arrived in Spata was not at all what tey expected: H e  wore
his hair untrimmed (as they did) , took cold baths, ate coarse bread ad
1 .0 K I·:\ZO  IlE'                                                              \l E I ) I ( : 1
black broth, and wore simple clothes. To   the Spartans this signified that he
SEIH                                                                             n                                                                             , T I I I·:  POPE
had come to see their way of life as superior to te Athenian; greater than
Lorenzo [de' Medici!
they were, he had chosen to be a Spartan rather than being bor one, and
lost no opportunily of
increasing the respect                                                           should thus be honored above all others. They fell under his speIl and
which Pope {nnocent                                                              gave hir great powers. Unfortunately Alcibiades rarely knew how to
now feit for hir and of
rein in his charm-he managed to seduce the king of Sparta's wife and
gaining his friendship
mae her pregnant. When this became public he once more had to flee
ifpossible his affection.
He took the trouble to                                                           for his life.
discover the Pope:,
This time Alcibiades defected to Persia, where he suddenly went fom
tastes and indulged
Spartan simplicity to embracing the lavish Persian lifestyle down to the last
ther accordingly. He
detail. It was of course immensely flattering to the Persians to see a Greek
sent hirn . . . casks of
his favourile wine. .                                                            of Alcibiades' stature prefer their culture over his own, and they showered
He sent hir courteous.                                                           hir with honors, land, and power. Once seduced by the mirror, they failed
flattering letters in
                                                                                 to notce that behind tis shield Alcibiades was playing a double game, se­
which he assured hir.
when the Pope was ill.                                                           cretly helping the Athenians in their wa with Sparta ad thus reingratat­
that he feit his suffer­                                                         ing hirself with the cit to which he desperately wanted to ret                , and
ings as thOl'lh they
which welcomed hir back with open arms in 408 B.C.
were his own. in which
Interpretation
he encouraged hir
with such fortifyinl                                                             Early in his political career, Alcibiades made a discovery that changed his
statements as Ha Pope                                                            whole approach to power: He had a colorfl and forcefl personality, but
is what he wills to be. "
when he argued his ideas strongly with other people he would win over a
and in which, as
few while at the same time alienatng may more. The secret to ganing as­
though incidentally. he
included his views on                                                            cendancy over large numbers, he came to believe, was not to impose his
the proper course of                                                             colors but to absorb the colors of those around hir, like a chameleon.
papal policies. {nnocent
Once people fell for the trick, the deceptons he went on to practce would
was gratified by
be invisible to tem.
Lorenzo's attentions
and convinced by his                                                                                                                                           Understand: Everyone is wrapped up in their own narcissistic shell.
arguments                                                                        So                                                                            When you try to impose your own ego on them, a wall goes up, resistance
corpletely, indeed, did
is increased. By mirroring them, however, you seduce them into a kind of
he core to share his
narcissistic rapture: They are gazing at a double of their own soul. This
opinions that. as the
di.wruntled Ferrarese                                                            double is actually manufactured in its entirety by you. Once you have used
arbassador put it                                                                the mirror to seduce them, you have great power over them.
Hthe Pope sleeps wilh
It is worth notng, however, the dangers in te promiscuous use of the
the eyes of the Magnifi­
mirror. In Alcibiades' presence people feIt lager, as if their egos had been
cent Lorenzo...
TIIE 10lJSE                                                                      doubled. But once he left, they feIt empty and diminished, and when they
OF MElJICI:                                                                      saw hir mirroring completely different people as totally as he had mir­
r S R I S E  A N D  FALL.
CHRISTOPHER HIRBERT.                                                             rored them, they feIt not just diminished but betayed. Alcibiades' overuse
1 980                                                                            of the Mirror Effect made whole peoples feel used, so that he constantly
had to flee from one place to another. Indeed Alcibiades so angered the
Spartans that they finally had hir murdered. He had gone too far. The Se­
ducer's Mirror must be used with cauton and discriminaton.
Observance 111
In 1652 the recently widowed Baroness Mancini moved her family for
Rome to Paris, where she could count on the influence and protection of
382                                                                              LAW 4 4

her  brother  Cadinal  Mazarin,  the  French  prime  minister.  Of the
baroness's five daughters, four dazzled the court with their beauty ad high
Wittgenstein had an
spirits. These infamously charming nieces of Cardinal Mazarin became
extraordinary gift for
known as the Mazarinettes, and soon found themselves invited to all the         divining the thoughts
most important court fnctions.                                                  of the person with
whom he was engaged
One daughter, Marie Mancini, did not shae this good fortune, for she
in discussion. Whi/e the
lacked the beauty and grace of her sisters-who, along with her mother
other strugg/ed to put
ad even Cadinal Mazarin, eventually came to dislike her, for they feit          his thought into words,
she spoiled the family image. They tried to persuade her to enter a con­        Wittgenstein wou/d
                                                                                perceive what it was
vent, where she would be less of an embarrassment, but she refsed. In­
                                                                                and state it for him.
stead  she  applied  herself to  her  studies,  leaing Latin  ad  Greek,        This power ofhis,
perfecting her French, and practcing her musica skills. On the rare occa­       which sometimes
sions when the family would let her attend court affairs, she trained herself   .\'cered uncanny, was
made possible, I am
to be an artfl listener, sizing people up for their weaknesses and hidden
sure, by his own
desires. And when she finally met the fture King Louis XIV, in 1657
pr%  nged and continu­
(Louis was seventeen years old, Marie eighteen), she decided that to spite      ous researches.
her family and unde, she would find a way to make this young man fall in        LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN:
A M E M O I R ,
love with her.
NORMAN MALCOLM,
This was a seemingly impossible task for such a plain-Iooking girl, but         1 958
Marie studied the fture king dosely. She noticed that her sisters' fivolity
did not please hir, and she sensed that he loathed the scheming and petty
politicking that went on all around hir. She saw that he had a romantic na­
ture-he read adventure novels, insisted on marching at the head of his
amies, and had high ideals and a passion for glory. The court did not feed
these fantasies of his; it was a baal, superficia world that bored hir.
The doctor shou/d be
The key to Louis's heart, Marie saw, would be to construct a mirror re­         opaque to his patient'·,
flecting his fantasies and his youthfl yeaings for glory and romance. To        and like a mirror,
shou/d show them
begin with she immersed herself in the romantic novels, poems, and plays
nothing but what is
that she knew the young king read voraciously.                                  Wen Louis began to en­
shown to him.
gage her in conversaton, to his delight she would talk of the things that       SIGMllND FREIJl),
strred his soul-not this fashion or that piece of gossip, but rather courtly    1856-1939
love, the deeds of great knights, the nobility of past kings and heroes. She
fed his thirst for glory by creating an image of an august, superior king
whom he could aspire to become. She stirred his imagination.
As the future Sun King spent more and more time in Marie's presence,
it eventually became dea that he had fallen in love with the least likely
young woman of the court. To    the horror of her sisters and mother, he
showered Marie Macini with attenton. He brought her aong on his mili­
tary campaigns, and made a show of statoning her where she could watc
as he marched into battle. He even promised Marie that he would marry
her and make her queen.
Mazarin, however, would never allow the king to marry his niece, a
woman who could bring Frace no diplomate or royal alliances. Louis had
to marry a princess of Spain or Austria. In 1658 Louis succumbed to the
pressure and agreed to break off the first romantic involvement of his life.
He did so with much regret, ad at the end of his life he acknowledged that
he never loved anyone as much as Marie Mancini.
LAW 44                                                                          383

Interpretation
Maie Mancini played the seducer's ga                                               e to perfecton. First, she took a
step back, to study her prey. Seducton often fails to get past the first step
because it is too aggressive; the first  move  must always  be  a reteat. By
studying the king fom a distace Maie saw what distinguished hir fom
others-his high ideals, romatic nature, and snobbish disdain for petty
politcs. Marie's next step was to make a mirror for these hidden ye                angs
on Louis's part, lettng hir glimpse what he hirself could be                       -a godlike
king!
This mirror had severa fnctons: Satsfing Louis's ego by giving hir
a double to look at, it also focused on hir so exdusively as to give him te
feeling that Marie exsted for hir alone. Surrounded by a pac of schem­
ing courtiers who only ha their own self-interest a heat, he could not fall
to be touched by this devotonal focus. Finally Marie's mirror set up an
ideal for hir to live up to: the noble knight of the medieval court. To   a soul
both romantic and ambitous, nothing could be more intoxicating than to
have someone hold up an idealized reflecton of hir. In effect it was Maie
Mancini who created the image of the Sun King-indeed Louis later ad­
mitted  the  enormous part  she  ha  played in fashioning his radiant self­
image.
This is the power of the Seducer's Mirror: By doubling the tates and
ideals of the target, it shows your attenton to his or her psychology, an at­
tention more chaming than any aggressive pursuit. Find out what sets the
other person apat, then hold up the mirror that will reflect it ad bring it
out of them. Feed their fantasies of power and greatness by reflectng their
ideas, and they will succumb.
Observance IV
In  1538, with the death of his mother, Helena, the eight-year-old fture
czar Ivan IV  (or  Ivan the Terrible) of Russia became a orphan. For the
next five years he watched as the princely dass, the boyars, terrorized the
county.  Now  and  then, to mock the  young Iva, they would make him
wear a crown and scepter and place hir on  the throne. When the  little
boy's feet dangled over the edge of the char, they would laugh and lif him
off it, handing hir fom man to man in the air, making hir feel his help­
lessness compared to them.
When Ivan was thirteen, he boldly murdered the boyar leader ad as­
cended to the throne. For the next few decades he stuggled to subdue the
boyars' power, but they contnued to def hir. By 1575 his efforts to trans­
form Russia and  defeat its enemies had exhausted hir. Meawhile, his
subjects were complaining bitterly about his endless wars, his secret police,
the unvanquished and oppressive boyars. His own ministers bega to ques­
ton his moves. Finally he had had enough. In  1564 he had temporarily
abandoned the throne, forcing his subjects to call hir back to power. Now
he took the strategy a step frther, ad abdicated.
To   take his place Ivan elevated a general of his, Simeon Bekbulatovich,
384                                                                                LAW 44

to the throne. But although Simeon had recently converted to Christianity,
he was by birth a Tatar, and his enthronement was an insult to Ivan's sub­
jects, since Russians looked down on the Tartars a inferiors and infidels.
Yet Ivan ordered that all Russians, including the boyars, pledge obedience
to their new ruler. And while Simeon moved into the Kremlin, Ivan lived
in a humble house on Moscow's outskirts, fom which he would sometmes
visit the palace, bow before the throne, sit among te other boyars, and
humbly petiton Simeon for favors.
Over time it became clear that Simeon was a kind ofking's double. He
dressed like Ivan, and acted like Ivan, but he had no rea power, since no
one would really obey hir. The boyars at the court who were old enough
to remember tauntng Ivan when he was a boy, by placing hir on the
throne, saw the connection: They had made Ivan feel like a wea pre­
tender, so now he mirrored them by placing a wea pretender of his own
on the throne.
For two long years Ivan held the mirror of Simeon up to the Rssian
people. The mirror said: Your whining and disobedience have made me a
czar with no real power, so I will reflect back to you a czar with no real
power. You have treated me disrespectlly, so I will do te same to you,
making Russia the laughingstock of the world. In 1577, in the name of te
Russian people, the chastsed boyas once again begged Iva to retur to
the throne, which he did. He lived as czar untl his deat, in 1584, and the
eonspiracies, complaning, and second-guessing disappeared along with
Simeon.
Interpretation
In 1564, after threatening to abdicate, Ivan had been grated absolute pow­
ers. But tese powers had slowly been chipped away as every sector of so­
eiety-te boyars, the church, the goverment-vied for more contol.
Foreign was had exhausted the county, interal bickering had increased,
and Ivan's attempts to respond had been met with scor. Rssia had tured
ito a kind of boisterous classroom in which the pupils laughed openly at
te teaeher. If he raised his voice or complained, he only met more resis­
tace. He had to teach them a lesson, give them a taste of their own medi­
eine. Simeon Bekbulatovich was the mirror he used to do so.
Afer two years in which te trone had been an object of ridicule and
disgust, the Russian people leamed their lesson. They wanted their cza
back, conceding to hir a te dignity and respect that the position should
always have commanded. For the rest of his reign, Russia and Ivan got
aong fine.
Understand: People are locked in their own experiences. When you
whine about some insensitivity on teir part, they may seem to understand,
but inwadly they are untouched and even more resistat. The goa of
power is always to lower people's resistance to you. For this you need
tcks, and one trick is to teach them a lesson.
Instead of haranguing people verbaly, then, create a kind of mirror of
teir behavior. In doing so you leave tem two choices: They can ignore
LAW 4 4                                                                      385

you, or they can start to think about themselves. And even if they ignore
you, you will have planted a seed in their unconscious that will eventually
take root. When you mirror their behavior, incidentally, do not be afaid to
add a touch of caricature and exaggeration, as Ivan did by enthroning a
Tartar-it is the little spiee in the soup that will open their eyes and make
them see the ridiculousness in their own actions.
Observance V
Dr. Milton H. Erickson, a pioneer in strategie psychotherapy, would ofen
educate his patents powerflly but indirectly by creatng a kind of mirror
effect. Constuctng an anaogy to make patents see the tuth on their own,
he would bypass their resistance to chage. When Dr. Erickson teated
married couples complaining of sexual problems, for instance, he often
found that psychotherapy's traditon of direct confrontaton ad probIer­
aring only heightened the spouses' resistance and sharpened their differ­
ences. Instead, he would draw a husband and wife out on other topics,
ofen banal ones, trying to find an anaogy for the sexual conflict.
In one couple's first session, the pair were discussing their eatng
habits, especially at dinner. The wife preferred the leisurely approach-a
drink before the meal, some appetizers, and ten a small main course, all at
a slow, civilized pace. This frustated the husbad-he wanted to get din­
ner over quickly and to dig right into the main course, the bigger the better.
As the conversaton continued, the couple bega to catch glimpses of an
analogy to their problems in bed. The moment they made this connection,
however, Dr. Erickson would chage the subject, caeflly avoiding a dis­
cussion of the real problem.
The couple thought Erickson was just getting to know them and would
deal with the problem directly the next tme he saw them. But at the end of
this first session, Dr. 'Erickson directed them to arrange a dinner a few
nights away that would combine each person's desire: The wife would get
the slow meal, including tme spent bonding, ad the husband would get
the big dishes he wanted to eat. Without realizing they were acting under
the doctor's gentle guidance, the couple would walk into a mirror of their
problem, and in the mirror they would solve teir problems themselves,
ending the evening just as the doctor had hoped-by mirroring the im­
proved dinner dynamies in bed.
In dealing with more severe problems, such as the schizophrenie's
mirror fatasy world of his or her own constuction, Dr. Erickson would a­
ways try to enter the mirror ad work within it. He once teated a hospital
inmate who believed he was Jesus Christ-draping sheets aound his
body, tlking in vague parables, and bombading sta and patients wit
endless Christia proselytizing. No therapy or drugs seemed to work, untl
one day Dr. Erickson went up to the young man ad said, "I understand
you have had experience as a carpenter." Being Christ, the patient had to
say that he had had such experience, and Erickson immediately put hir to
work building bookcases and other usefl items, alowing hir to wear his
Jesus garb. Over the next weeks, as the patient worked on these projects,
386                                                                              LAW 44

his mind became less occupied with Jesus fantasies and more focused on
his labor. As the carpentry work took precedence, a psychic shif took ef­
feet: The religious fantasies remained, but faded comfortably into the back­
gound, allowing the man to fncton in society.
Interpretation
Communicaton depends on metaphors and symbols, which are te basis
of language itself. A metaphor is a kind of mirror to the concrete and real,
which it ofen expresses more clearly and deeply than a literal descripton
does. When you are dealing with the intractable willpower of other people,
direct communication ofen only heightens their resistance.
This happens most clearly when you complain about people's behav­
ior, partcularly in sensitve areas such as their lovemaking. You will effect
a far more lastng change if, like Dr. Erickson, you construct an analogy, a
symbolic mirror of the situation, ad guide the other through it. As Christ
hirself understood, talking in parables is ofen the best way to teac a les­
son, for it allows people to realize the truth on their OW.
Wen dealing with people who are lost in the reflections of fantasy
worlds  (including a host of people who do not live in mental hospitals),
never try to push them into reality by shattering their mirrors.  Instead,
enter their world and operate inside it, under their rules, gently guiding
them out of the hall of mirrors they have entered.
Observance VI
The   great  sixteenth-century Japanese  tea  master  Taeno   Sho-o   once
passed by a house and notced a young man watering flowers nea his front
gate. Two things caught Sho-o's attenton-first, the gacefl way the man
performed his task; and, second, the stunningly beautifl rose of Sharon
blossoms that bloomed in the garden. He stopped and intoduced hirself
to the man, whose name was Sen no Rikyu. Sho-o wanted to stay, but he
had a prior engagement and had to hurry off. Before he lef, however,
Rikyu invited hir to take tea with him the following moring. Sho-o hap­
pily accepted.
Wen Sho-o opened the garden gate the next day, he was horrified to
see  that  not  a single  flower remained. More than anything else, he had
come to see the rose of Sharon blossoms that he had not had the tme to ap­
preciate the day before; now, disappointed, he stated to leave, but at the
gate he stopped hirself, and decided to enter Sen no Rikyu's tea room. Im­
mediately inside, he stopped in his tacks and gazed in astonishment: Be­
fore hir a vase hung fom the ceiling, and in the vase stood a single rose of
Sharon blossom, the most beautfl in the garden. Somehow Sen no Rikyu
had  rea his guest's thoughts,  and,  with this one eloquent gesture, had
demonstated tat tis day guest and host would be in perfect harmony.
Sen no Rikyu went on to become the most famous tea master of all,
and his trademark was this uncanny ability to harmonize hirself with his
guests' thoughts and to think one step ahead, enchantng them by adaptng
to their taste.
One day Rikyu was invited to tea by Yamashina Hechigwan, an ad-
LAW 44                                                                         387

mirer o f  the tea ceremony but aso a man with a vivid sense o f  humor.
When Rikyu arrived at Hechigwan's hore, he found the garden gate shut,
so he opened it to look for the host. On the other side of the gate he saw
that someone had first dug a ditch, then careflly covered it over with can­
vas and earth. Realizing that Hechigwan had planed a practcal joke, he
obligingly walked right into the ditch, muddying his clothes in the process.
Apparently  horrified,   Hechigwan  came  running  out,  and  hurried
Rikyu to a bath that for some inexplicable reason stood already prepared.
Aer bathing, Rikyu joined Hechigwan in the tea ceremony, which both
enjoyed  immensely,  sharing  a laugh  about  the  accident.  Later  Sn  no
Rikyu explained to a friend that he had heard about Hechigwan's practical
joke beforehand, "But since it should always be one's aim to conform to
the wishes of one's host, I fell into the hole knowingly and thus assured the
success of the meetng. Tea is by no means mere obsequiousness, but there
is no tea where the host and guest ae not in harmony with one another."
Hechigwan's vision of the dignified Sen no Rikyu at the bottom of a ditch
had pleased him endlessly, but Rikyu  had gained a pleasure of his  own
in  complying with  his  host's  wish  and  watcing him  amuse hirself in
this way.
Interpretation
Sen no Rikyu was no magician or seer-he watched those around hir
acutely, plumbing the subtle gestures that revealed a hidden desire, then
producing that desire's image. Although Sho-o never spoke of being en­
chanted by the rose of Sharon blossoms, Rikyu read it in his eyes. If mir­
roring a person's desires meant falling into a ditch, so be it. Rkyu's power
resided in his skillfl use of the Courter's Mirror, which gave hir the ap­
pearance of an unusual ability to see into other people.
Lea                                                                             to maipulate the Courtier's MirrOf, for it will bring you great
power. Study people's eyes, follow their gestures                               surer barometers of pain
and pleasure than any spoken word. Notice and remember the details              the
clothing, the  choice of friends, the  daily habits, the  tossed-out remarks­
that reveal hidden and rarely indulged desires. Soak it all in, find out what
lies under the  surface, then make yourself the  mirror of their unspoken
selves. That is the key to this power: The other person has not asked for
your consideraton, has not mentioned his pleasure in  the rose of  Shaon,
and when you reflect it back to hir his pleasure is heightened because it is
unasked for. Remember: The wordless communicaton, the indirect com­
pliment, contans the most power. No one can resist the enchant                  ent of the
Courtier's Mirror.
Observance VII
Yellow Kid Weil, con artist extraordinaire, used the Deceiver's Mirror in
his most brilliat cons. Most audacious of all was his re-creaton of a ban
in Muncie, Indiaa. When Weil read one day that the Merchants Bank in
Muncie had moved, he  saw an opportunity he  could not pass up.
Weil rented out the original Merchants building, which stll contained
bank friture,  complete  with  teller windows.  He  bought  money bags,
388                                                                             LAW 44

stenciled a bank's invented name on them, filled them with steel washers,
and arayed them impressively behind the teller windows, along with bun­
dIes of boodle-rea bills hiding newspaper cut to size. For his bank's staff
ad customers Weil hired gambIers, bookies, girls fom local bawdy
houses, and other assorted confederates. He even had a local thug pose as a
bank dick.
Claming to be the broker for a certificate investment te bank was of­
fering, Weil would fish the waters and hook the proper wealty sucker. He
would bring this man to the bak and ask to see the president. A "officer"
of the bank would tell them that they had to wait, which only heightened
the realism of the con-one always has to wait to see the bak president.
And as they waited the bank would bustle with banklike activity, as call
girls and bookies in disguise floated in and out, making deposits and with­
drawals and tpping their hats to the phony bank dick. Lulled by this per­
feet copy of reaity, te sucker would deposit $50,000 into the fake bank
without a worry in the world.
Over the years Weil did the same thing with a deserted yacht club, an
abandoned brokerage office, a relocated real estate office, ad a com­
pletely realistc gambling club.
Interpretation
The mirroring of reality offers immense deceptive powers. The right uni­
form, te perfect accent, the proper propsthe deception cannot be deci­
phered because it is enmeshed in a simulaton of reaity. People have an
intense desire and need to believe, and their first instinct is to tust a well­
construeted facade, to mistake it for reaity. After a, we cannot go around
doubtng the reaity of eve                                                         r                                                               ing we see-tat would be too exhaustng.
We  habitually accept appeaances, ad this is a credulity you can use.
In this particular game it is the first moment that counts the most. If
YOU suckers' suspicions ae not raised by their first glance at the mirror's
reflection, they will stay suppressed. Once they enter your hall of mirrors,
they will be unable to distnguish the real from the fae, and it will become
easier ad easier to deceive tem. Remember: Study te world's surfaces
and leam to mirror them in your habits, your manner, YOU clothes. Like a
camivorous plant, to unsuspectng insects you will look like all the other
plats in the field.
Authority: The task of a military operation is to accord decep­
tively with the intentions ofthe enemy . . . get to what they want
first, subtly anticipate them. Maintain discipline and adapt to
the enemy                                                                         Thus, at first you are like a maiden, so the enemy
                                                                                  opens his door; then you are like a rabbit on the loose, so
                                                                                  the enemy cannot keep you out. (Sun-tzu, fourth century B.C.)
                                                                                                                                                  LAW 44                                   389

Image:   The
Shield of Perseus. I t  is pol­
ished into a reflecting mirror.
Medusa cannot see you, only her
own hideousness reflected back at her.
Behind  such  a mirror you can  de­
ceive,  mock,  and  infuriate.  With
one blow you sever Medusa's
unsuspecting  head.
A WARN I N G :  B EWARE OF M I RRO RED S ITUATI O N S
Mirrors contan great power but also dangerous reefs, including the mir­
rored situaton-a situaton that seems to reflect or closely resemble a pre­
vious one, mostly in style and surface appearance. You can ofen back into
such a sitation without fHy understading it, while those around you un­
derstand it quite weH, and compare it ad you to whatever happened be­
fore. Most ofen you suffer by the comparison, seeming either weaer tha
the previous occupant of your position or else tainted by any unpleasat
associatons that person has lef behind.
In 1864 the composer Richard Wagner moved to Munich at the behest
of Ludwig  11, known variously as  the Swan King or the  Mad King of
Bavaria. Ludwig was Wagner's biggest fan and most generous paton. The
stength of his support tumed Wagner's head-once established in Munic
under the king's protection, he would be able to say and do whatever he
wated.
Wagner moved into a lavish house, which the king eventually bought
for hir. This house was but a stone's throw from the former hore of Lola
Montez, the notorious courtesan who had plunged Ludwig lI's grandfather
into a crisis that had forced hir to abdicate. W                             aed that he could be in­
fected by this associaton, Wagner only scoffed-"I                            a                          no Lola Montez,"
he said. Soon enough, however, the citzens of Munic began to resent the
favors and money showered  on Wagner,  and  dubbed hir  "the  second
Lola," or "Lolotte. "  He unconsciously began to tread in Lola's footsteps
spending money extravagatly, meddling in matters beyond music, even
dabbling in politics and advising the king on cabinet appointments. Mean­
while Ludwig's affection for Wagner seemed intense and undignified for a
king-just like his grandfather's love for Lola Montez.
390                                                                          LAW 44

Eventually Ludwig's ministers wrote bim a letter: "Your Majesty now
stands at a fatefl parting of the ways: you have to coose beteen the love
and respect of your faithfl people and the 'friendship' of Ricard Wag­
ner. " In December of 1865, Ludwig politely asked bis fiend to leave and
never ret                                                                      . Wagner had inadvertently placed himself in Lola Montez's
reflecton. Once there, everything he did reminded te stolid Bavarians of
tat dread woman, and there was nothing he could do ab out it.
Avoid such associaton-effects like te plague. In a mirrored situation
you have litte or no contol over the reflectons and recollectons that          w
be connected to you, and any situation beyond your control is dagerous.
Even if the person or event has positive associatons, you will suffer fom
not being able t live up to them, since the past generally appears greater
than the present. If you ever notce people associatng you with some past
event  or  person,  do  everyting  you  can to  separate  yourself from that
memory and to shatter te reflection.
LAW 4 4                                                                        391

LAW
45
PREACH THE NEED
FOR CHANGE, BUT
NEVER REFORM
TOO MUCH AT ONCE
JUDGMENT
Everone understands the need for change in the ab
stract, but on the day-to-day level peole are creatures of
habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will lad
to revolt. Iyou are new to a position of power or an out­
sider trying to build a power base, make a show of  n­
specting the  old way of    doing things.  I change  is
necessar, make it feel like a gentl improvement on the
past.
392

TRAN S G RE S S I O N  OF THE LAW
Sometme in the early 1520s, King Henry VIII of England decided to di­
WIIEHE CHHISTMAS
vorce his wife, Caterine of Aragon, because she had failed to bear hir a
CAME FHOM
son, ad because he had fallen in love with te young and comely Anne           Celebrating the turn of
Boleyn. The pope, Clement VII, opposed the divorce, and threatened the        the year is an ancient
custom. The Romans
kng wit excommunicaton. The king's most powerfl minister, Cardina
celebrated the Saturna­
Wolsey, also saw no need for divorce-and his halfeated support of te
lia, the festival of
king cost hir his positon and soon his life.                                  Satur, god of the
harvest, between
One man in Henry's cabinet, Thomas CromwelI, not only supported
December 1 7 and 23. It
him in his desire for a divorce but had an idea for rea                       ing it: a complete
was the most cheerful
break with the past. He convinced te king tat by severing tes with Rome
festival of the year. All
                                                                              ad making hirself the head of a newly formed English church, he could       work and commerce
                                                                              divorce Catherine ad mary Anne. By 1531 Henry saw tis as the only so­       stopped, and the streets
                                                                                                                                                          were filled with crowds
                                                                              luton. To    rewad Cromwell for his simple but brilliat idea, he elevated
                                                                                                                                                          and a carnival atmos­
                                                                              this son of a blacksmith to the post of royal councillor.                   phere. Slaves were
                                                                              By  1534 Cromwell had been named te king's secretay, and a the              temporarily freed, and
                                                                                                                                                          the houses were deco­
                                                                              power behind the throne he had become the most powerfl man in Eng­
                                                                              '                                                                           rated with laurel
                                                                              land. But for hir the break wit Rome went beyond                            the satsfacton of the
                                                                                                                                                          branches. People
kng's ca                                                                      al  desires: He envisioned a new Potestant order in England,                visited one another,
                                                                              with the power of the Catolic Church smashed and its vat wealt in te        bringing gifts ofwax
candles and little clay
hands of the king and the govemment. In that same yea he initated a
figurines.
complete survey of the curches ad monasteries of England. And as it
Long before the birth
ted out, the teasures and moneys tat te churches had accumulated              of Christ, the lews cele­
over the  centuries  were fa more tha  he had  imagined; his  spies  and      brated an eight-day
Festival of Lights [at
agents came back with astonishing figures.
the same season}, and it
To   justf his schemes, Cromwell circulated stories about the corrup­
is believed that the
ton in the English monasteries, their abuse of power, their exploitaton of    Germanie peoples held
the people they supposedly served. Having won Parliament's support for        a great festival not only
at midsummer but also
breaing up the monateries, he began to seize their holdings ad to put
at the winter solstice,
them out of existence one by one. At the same tme, he began to impose
when they celebrated
Potestantsm, intoducing reforms in religious ritual and punishing those       the rebirth of the sun
who stuck to  Catholicism,  ad who now were called heretcs. Virtually         and honored the great
fertility gods Wotan
over                                                                          ght, England was converted to a new official religion.
and Freyja, Donar
A  terror  fell  on the county.  Some  people had suffered under the
(Thor) and Freyr. Even
Catholic Church, which before the reforms had been immensely powerfl,         after the Emperor
but most Britons had stong ties to Catholicism ad to its comfortng ritu­      Constantine (A.D.
                                                                              306-337) declared
as. They watched in horror as churches were demolished, images of the
                                                                              Christianity to be
Madonna ad saints  were broken in pieces, stained-glass windows were          Rome's official impe­
smashed, and the churches' teasures were confiscated. Wit monasteries         rial religion, the evoca­
tat had  succored  the  poor  suddenly  gone,  the  poor  now  flooded  te    tion of light and
fertility as an important
steets. The growing ranks of te begar dass were frther swelled by for­
component ofpre­
mer monks. On top of all this, CromwelI levied high taes to pay for his ec­
Christian midwinter
clesiastical reforms.                                                         celebrations could not
be entirely suppressed.
In 1535 powerfl revolts in the Nort of England threatened to toppie
In the year 274 the
Henry fom his throne. By te following year he had suppressed the rebel­
Roman Emperor Aure­
Hons, but he had also begun to see te costs of Cromwell's reforms. The        lian (A.D. 214-275) had
king hirself had never wated to go this far-he had only wanted a di-          established an official
                                                                              LAW 45                                                                      393

mit of the sun-god                                                             vorce. It was now Cromwell's tur to watch uneasily as te king began
Mithras, declaring his
slowly to undo his reforms, reinstatng Catholic sacraments ad oter ritu­
birthday, December 25,
als that Cromwell had outlawed.
a national holiday. The
cult of Mithras, the                                                           Sensing  his  fal  fom  grace,  in                                            1540   Cromwell  decided  to  regain
A ryan god of light, had                                                       Henry's favor with one throw of the dice: He would fnd the king a new
spread from Persia
wife. Henry's third wife, lane Seymour, had died a few years before, ad
through Asia Minor (0
he had been pining for a new young queen. It was Cromwell who found
Greece, Rome, and as
far as the Germanie                                                            hir  one:  Anne  of Cleves,  a  Germa princess  and,  most important to
lands and Britain.                                                             Cromwell, a Potestat. On Cromwell's commission, the panter Holbein
Numerous ruins ofhis
produced a flattering portrait of Anne; when Henry saw it, he fell in love,
shrines still testify   to
and agreed to marry her. Cromwell seemed back in favor.
the high regard in
which this god was                                                             Unfortunately, however, Holbein's paintng was highly idealized, and
held, especially by the
when the king finally met the princess she  did not please hir in the least.
Roman legions, as a
His anger against Cromwell-first for the ill-conceived reforms, now for
bringer offertility,
peace, and victory.                                                            saddling hir with an unattactive and Potestant wife-could no longer be
So it was a clever move                                                        contained. In lune of that yea, Cromwell was arrested, charged as a Potes­
when, in the year A.D.                                                         tant extemist and a heretc, ad sent to the Tower. Six weeks later, before a
354, the Christian
large and enthusiastc crowd, the public executioner cut off his head.
church under Pope
Liberius (352-366) co­
opted the birthday of                                                          Interpretation
Mithras and declared
Thomas Cromwell had a simple idea: He would break up the power and
December 25 to be
wealth of the Church ad lay the foundaton for Potestantsm in England.
the birthday
of Jesus Christ.                                                               And he would do this in a mercilessly short tme. He knew his speedy re­
NEIJE ZIJRCIIER                                                                forms  would cause pain and resentment, but he thought these  feelings
ZEITUNG,
would fade in  a few years.  More important, by identifing hirself with
ANNE-SUSANNE
RISCHKE,                                                                       change, he would become the leader of the new order, making the king de­
DECEMHER 25, 1983
pendent on hir. But there was a problem in his stategy: Like a billiard
ball hit too hard against the cushion, his reforms had reactions and caroms
he did not envision and could not contol.
The man who initates stong reforms ofen becomes the scapegoat for
any kind of dissatisfaction. And eventually the reacton to his reforms may
consume hir, for change is upsettng to the huma animal, even when it is
for the good. Because te world is and always has been fll of insecurity
and threat, we latch on to familiar faces and create habits ad rituals to
mae the  world  more  comfortable.  Change  ca be  pleasat  and  even
sometimes desirable in the abstact, but too much of it creates an anxiety
that will str ad boil beneath the surface ad then eventualy erupt.
Never underestmate the hidden conservatism of those around you. It
is powerfl and entenched. Never let the seductive charm of an idea cloud
your reason: lust as you cannot mae people see the world your way, you
cannot wrench them into the future with painfl changes. They will rebel.
If reform is necessay, atcipate the reacton against it and find ways to
disguise the change and sweeten the poison.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
As a young Communist in the 1920s, Mao Tse-tung understood better than
any of his colleagues te incredible odds against a Communist victory in
394                                                                            LAW 4 5

China. With their small numbers, limited fnds, lack of military experi­
ence, and small asenal of weapons, the Party had no hope of success un­
less it won over China's immense peasat populaton. But who in the
world was more conservatve, more rooted in tadition, than the Chinese
peasanty? The oldest civilizaton on the planet had a history that would
never loosen its power, no matter how violent the revoluton. The ideas of
Confcius remained as aive in the 1920s as tey had been in the sixth cen­
tury B.C., when the philosopher was aive. Despite the oppressions of the
current system, would the peasatry ever give up the deep-rooted values of
the past for the great unknown of Communism?
The soluton, as Mao saw it, involved a simple decepton: Cloak the
revoluton in the clothing of the past, making it comfortng ad legitimate
in people's eyes. One of Mao's favorite books wa the very popular me­
dieval Chinese novel The Water Margin, which recounts the exploits of a
Chinese Robin Hood ad his robber bad as they struggle against a cor­
rupt and evil monach. In China in Mao's tme, family ties dominated over
any other kind, for the Confcia hierarchy of father and oldest son re­
mained firmly in place; but The Wter Margin preached a superior value­
the frateral tes of the band of robbers, the nobility of the cause that unites
people beyond blood. The novel had great emotonal resonance for Chi­
nese people, who love to root for the underdog. Time and again, then,
Mao would present his revolutionary army as a extension of the robber
band in Te Wter Margin, likening his struggle to the tmeless conflict be­
tween the oppressed peasanty and a evil emperor. He made the past
seem to envelop ad legtimize the Communist cause; the peasaty could
feel comfortable with and even support a group with such roots in the past.
Even on ce the Party cae to power, Mao contnued to associate it with
the past. He presented himself to the masses not as a Chinese Lenin but as
a moder Chuko Liang, the real-life third-century strategist who figures
prominently in the popular historical novel The Romance 0/ the Tree Kin­
doms. Liang was more than a great general-he was a poet, a philosopher,
and a figure of ster moral recttude. So Mao represented himself as a poet­
warior like Liag, a man who mixed strategy with philosophy and
preached a new ethics. He made himself appear like a hero from the geat
Chinese traditon of warrior statesmen.
Soon, everything in Mao's speeches and writings had a reference to an
earlier period in Chinese history. He recalled, for example, the great Em­
peror Ch'in, who had unified the county in the tird century B.C. Ch'in
had bured the works of Confcius, consolidated and completed the build­
ing of the Great Wall, and given his nae to China. Like Ch'in, Mao also
had brought the country together, and had sought bold reforms against an
oppressive past. Ch'in had taditionally been seen as a violent dictator
whose reign was short; the brilliance of Mao's strategy was to tur this
around, simultaneously reinterpretng Ch'in, justfing his rule in the eyes
of present-day Chinese, ad using him to just the violence of the new
order that Mao himself was creatng.
Mter the failed Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s, a power struggle
LAW 45                                                                           395

emerged in the Communist Pa                                                       in which Mao's main foe wa Lin Pa,
once a elose fiend of his. To   make elear to the masses te difference be­
teen his philosophy ad Ln's, Mao once agan exploited the past: He
cast his  opponent a representng Confcius, a philosopher Lin in fact
would constantly quote. And Confcius signified te conservatsm of te
past. Mao associated himself, on the other had, with te ancient philo­
sophica movement known as Legalism, exemplified by the writings of
Han-fei-tzu. The Legalists disdained Confcian ethics; they believed in the
need for violence to create a new order. They worshiped power. To   give
hirself weight in the struggle, Mao unleahed a natonwide propaganda
campaign against Confcius, using the issues of Confciasm versus Le­
galism to whip the young into a kind of frenzied revolt against the older
generation. This grad context enveloped a rather banal power stuggle,
and Mao once again won over the masses and tiumphed over his enemies.
Interpretation
No people had a more profound attacment to the past than te Chinese.
In the face of tis enormous obstaele to reform, Mao's stategy was simple:
Instead of stuggling against the past, he                                         ted it to his advatage, associ­
atng his radical Communists with the romatc figures of Chinese history.
Weaving te story of the War of te Three Kingdoms into the stuggle be­
tween te United States, the Soviet Union, and China, he cast hirself as
Chuko Liang. As the emperors had, he welcomed the cultlike adoraton of
te masses, understading that  the  Chinese could not fncton witout
some kind of fater figure to admire. And afer he made a terrible blunder
wit the Great Leap Forward, tying to force moderizaton on te count
and faling miserably, he never repeated his mistake: From ten on, radical
chage had to be eloaked in the comfortable elotes of the past.
The lesson is simple: The past is powerfl. What has happened before
seems greater; habit ad history give ay act weight. Use this to your ad­
vantage. When you destoy the familia you create a void or vacuum; peo­
pIe fear the chaos that will flood in to fill it. You must avoid strring up suc
fears at all cost. Borrow te weight and legitmacy fom the past, however
remote, to create a comfortng and familia presence. This will give your
actons romantc associatons, add to your presence, and eloa the nature
of te changes you are attempting.
It must be considered that thee is nothing more dificult to carr out,
nor more doubtful 0/ success, nor more dangeous to handl,
than to initiate a new order 0/ things.
Niccolo Machiavelli, 1 469-152 7
KEYS TO POWER
Human psychology contains many dualites, one of them being that even
while people understand the need for chage, knowing how important it is
for insttutons and individuas to be occasionally renewed, they are also i-
396                                                                               LAW 4 5

ritated and upset by changes that affect them personally. They know that
change is necessary, and that novelty provides relief from boredom, but
deep inside they cling to the past. Change in the abstact, or superficial
change, they desire, but a change that upsets core habits and routnes is
deeply disturbing to them.
No revoluton has gone without a powerfl later reaction against it, for
in the long run the void it creates proves too unsettling to the huma ani­
mal, who unconsciously associates suc voids with death and chaos. The
opportunity for change and renewal seduces people to the side of the revo­
luton, but once their enthusiasm fades, which it                                w, they are lef with a
certain emptiness. Yeaing for the past, they create an opening for it to
creep back in.
For Machiavelli, the prophet who preaces and brings change can
only survive by taking up ams: When the masses inevitably yea for the
past, he must be ready to use force. But the armed prophet canot last long
unless he quickly creates a new set of values and rituals to replace the old
ones, and to soothe the                                                         aietes of those who dread change. It is far easier,
and less bloody, to play a kind of con game. Peach chage as much as you
like, ad even enact your reforms, but give them the comforting appear­
ance of older events and traditons.
Reigning from A.D. 8 to A.D.  23,  te Chinese emperor Wang Mang
emerged fom a period of great historical turbulence in which the people
yeaed for order, a order represented for them by Confcius. Some two
hundred years earlier, however, Emperor Ch'in had ordered the writings
of Confcius bured. A few years later, word had spread that certain texts
had miraculously survived, hidden under the scolar's house. These texts
may not have been genuine, but they gave Wang his opportunity: He first
confiscated them, then had his scribes insert passages into them that
seemed to support the changes he had been imposing on the county.
When he released the texts, it seemed that Confcius sanctioned Wang's
reforms, and the people feIt comforted and accepted them more easily.
Understand: The fact that the past is dead and buried gives you the
freedom to reinterpret it. To   support YOUT cause, tnker with the facts. The
past is a text in which you ca safely insert YOUT own lines.
A simple ge sture like using an old title, or keeping the same number
for a group, will tie you to the past and support you with the authority of
history. As Machiavelli hirself observed, the Romans used this device
when they transformed their monarcy into a republic. They may have in­
stalled two consuls in place of the king, but since the king had been served
by twelve lictors, they retained the same number to serve under the con­
suls. The king had personally performed an anua sacrifice, in a great
spectacle that strred the public; the republic retained this practice, only
transferring it to a special "chief of the ceremony, whom they called the
King of the sacrifice." These and similar ge stures satsfied the people and
kept them from clamoring for te monacy's retur.
Another strategy to disguise change is to make a loud and public dis­
play of support for the values of the past. Seem to be a zeaot for tradition
LAW 4 5                                                                         397

and few will notce how unconventional you really are. Renaissance Flo­
rence had a centuries-old republic, and was suspicious of anyone who
flouted its traditons. Cosimo de' Medici made a show of enthusiatc sup­
port for the republic, while in reality he worked to bring the city under the
contol of his wealthy family. In form, te Medicis retained the appearace
of a republic; in substance, they rendered it powerless. They quietly en­
acted a radica change, while appeaing to saeguard tradition.
Science claims a search for truth that would seem to protect it fom
conservatsm and the irrationality of habit: It is a culture of innovaton. Yet
when Charles Darwin published his ideas of evoluton, he faced fiercer op­
position from his fellow scientsts than from religious authorities. His theo­
ries challenged too many fixed ideas. Jonas Salk ran into the same wall
with his radica innovations in immunology, as did Max Planck with his
revolutionizing of physics. Planck later wrote of the scientfic opposition he
faced, "A new scientfic tuth does not triumph by convincing its opponents
and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventualy
die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it."
The aswer to this innate conservatsm is to play the cOUfter's game.
Galileo did this at the beginning of his scientfic caeer; he later became
more confrontatonal, and paid for it. S pay lip service to tradition. Iden­
tif the elements in YOUf revolution that can be made to seem to build on
the past. Say te right tings, make a show of conformity, and meawhile
let YOUf theories do their radical work. Play with appearances and respect
past protocol. This is true in every arena-science being no exception.
Finally, powerfl people pay attention to the zeitgeist. If their reform is
too far ahead of its time, few will understand it, and it will stir up anxiety
and be hopelessly misinterpreted. The canges you make must seem less
innovative than they ae. Englad did eventually become a Potestant na­
ton, as Cromwell wished, but it took over a century of gradual evolution.
Watch the zeitgeist. If you work in a tumultuous tme, there is power to
be gained by preaching a retur to the past, to comfort, traditon, and rit­
ual. During a period of stagnaton, on the oter hand, play the card of re­
form and revoluton-but beware of what you stir up. Those who finish a
revoluton are rarely those who start it. You will not succeed at this danger­
ous game unless you are willing to fore stal the inevitable reaction against it
by playing with appearances and building on the past.
Authority: He who desires or attempts to reform the government of a
state, and wishes to have it accepted, must at least retain the semblance of
the oid forms; so that it may seem to the people that there has been no
change in the institutions, even though in fact they are entirely different
from the oid ones. For the great majority of mankind are satisfied with ap­
pearances, as though they were realities. (Niccolö Machiavelli, 1469-1527)
398                                                                               LAW 45

Image:  The  Cat.
Creature of habit, it loves the
warmth of the familiar. Upset its
routines, disrupt its space, and it will
grow unmanageable and psychotic.
Placate it by supporting its rituals. If
change is necessary, deceive the cat by
keeping the smell of the past alive;
place objects familiar to it in
strategie locations.
REVERSAL
The past is a corpse to be used as you see fit. If what happened in the re­
cent past was painfl and harsh, it is self-destructive to associate yourself
with it. When Napoleon came to power, the French Revoluton was fresh
in everyone's minds. If the court that he established had bore any resem­
blance to the lavish court of Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette, his courters
would have spent all their time worrying about their own necks. Instead,
Napoleon established a court remarkable for its sobriety ad lac of osten­
tation. It was the court of a man who valued work and military virtues. This
new form seemed appropriate and reassuring.
In other words, pay attention to the tmes. But understad: If you
make a bold change fom the past, you must avoid at all costs the appear­
ance of a void or vacuum, or you will create terror. Even a ugly recent his­
tory will seem preferable to an empty space. Fill that space immediately
with new rituals and forms. Soothing and growing familiar, these will seeure
your position among the masses.
Finally, the arts, fashion, and technology would seem to be areas in
which power would come from creating a radical rupture with the past and
appeaing cuttng edge. Indeed, such a stategy can bring great power, but
it has many dangers. It is inevitable that your innovations will be outdone
by someone else. You have little contol-someone younger and fresher
moves in a sudden new directon, making your bold innovaton of yester­
day seem tresome and tare today. You are forever playing catch-up; your
power is tenuous and short-lived. You wat a power built on something
more solid. Using the past, tinkering with tradition, playing with conven­
ton to subvert it will give your creations something more than a momen­
tary appeal. Periods of dizzying change disguise the fact that a yearing for
the past will inevitably creep back in. In the end, using the past for your
own purposes will bring you more power than tying to cut it out com­
pletely-a ftile and self-destuctve endeavor.
LAW                                                                            45   399

LAW
46
NEVER APPEAR
Ta O PERFECT
JUDGMENT
Apearing better than others is always dangerus, but
most dangerous of all is to apear to have no faults or
weaknesses. Envy creates silnt enemies. It is smart to oc­
casionally    display deects, and admit to harmlss vices,
in order to deflect envy and apear more human and ap­
proachable.  Only god and the dead can seem perfect
with impunity.
400

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Joe Orton met Kenneth Halliwell at te Royal Academy of Dramatic                     A,
                                                                                    TIIE I'ARABU              :                                 01" Tm       :
London, in 1953, where both had enrolled as actng students . They soon
                                                                                                              CHf:EDY   lA\ A \ f)  THE
became lovers and moved in together. Halliwell, tenty-five at the tme,              E\VlOl:S MAr
was seven years older than Orton, and seemed the more confident of the                                        A greedy man and an
envious man met a
two; but neither had muc taent as actors, and aer graduatng, having set­
king. The king said to
tled down together in a dank London apartent, they decided to give up
them, "One ofyou may
actng  and   collaborate   as  writers   instead.   Halliwell's  inheritance  was   ask something ofme
enough to keep them from having to find work for a few years, ad in the             and I will give it to
him, provided I give
beginning, he was also the driving force behind the stories ad novels they
twice as much to the
wrote ; he would dictate to Orton, who would type the manuscripts, occa­
other. " The envious
sionally inteIjectng his own lines and ideas.  Their fst efforts attacted           person did not want to
ask first for he was
some interest fom literary agents, but it sputtered. The promise they had
envious ofhis compan­
shown was leading nowhere.
ion who would receive
Eventually the inheritance money ran out, and the pair had to look for
twice as much, and the
work. Their collaboratons were less enthusiastc and less fequent. The f­            greedy man did not
want to ask first since
ture looked bleak.
he wanted everything
In 1957 Orton bega to write on his own, but it wasn't until five years
that was to be had.
later, when the lovers were jailed for six months for defacing dozens of li­                                  Finally the greedy one
brary books, that he began to find his voice (perhaps not by chance:                Tis                       pressed the envious one
was the first tme he and Haliwell had been separated in nine years) . He                                      to be the first to make
                                                                                                              the request. So the envi­
came out of prison determined to express his contempt for English society
                                                                                                              ous person asked the
in the form of theatical farces. He and Halliwell moved back in together,                                     king to pluck out one
but now the roles were reversed: Orton did the writng while Halliwell put           ofhis eyes.
in comments and ideas.                                                              JEWISH PARABLE,
THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS,
In 1964 Joe Orton completed his first fll-length play, EnteTtainin MT.
SOLOMON SCHIMMEL,
Sloane. The play made it to    London's West End, where it   received brilliat      1992
reviews: A great new writer had emerged fom nowhere. Now success fol­
lowed s lccess, at a dizzying pace. In 1966 Orton had a hit with his play
Loot, and his popularity soared. Soon commissions came in fom all sides,
including fom the Beatles, who paid Orton handsomely to write them a
film script.
Everything was pointng upwards, everything except Orton's relaton­
An admirer who feels
ship with Kenneth Halliwell. The pair stll lived togeter, but as  Orton             that he cannot be
grew successful, Halliwell began to deteriorate. Watching his lover become          happy by surrendering
                                                                                    himself elects to
the center of attenton, he suffered the humiliaton of becoming a kind of
                                                                                    become envious of that
persona assistant to the playwigt, his role in what had once been a col­            which he admires. So
laboration growing smaller ad smaller.  In the  1950s he had supported              he speaks another
Orton  with his  inheritance; now  Orton  supported  hir.  At  a party or           language-the thing
which he really admires
among fiends, people would naturally gravitate towards Orton-he was
is called a stupid,
charming, and his mood was almost always buoyant. Unlike the handsome
insipid and queer sort
Orton, Halliwell was bald and awkward; his defensiveness made people                of thing. Admiration is
happy self-surrender;
want to avoid hir.
envy is unhappy self­
With Orton's success the couple's problems only worsened. Halliwell's
assertion.
moods made their life together impossible .  Orton clamed to want to leave
S<REN KIERKEGAARD,
hir, and had numerous                                                               a                         ars, but would aways end up ret   ing to his   1813-1855
LAW 46                                                                              401

old friend and lover, H e  tied to help Halliwell iaunc a career as an artist,
even arranging for a gallery to show his work, but the show was a flop, and
It takes great talent and
this only heightened Halliwell's sense of inferiority. In May of 1967, the
skill to conceal one '.
talent and skilI.                                                                pair went on a brief holiday together in Tangier, Morocco. During the trip,
LA ROCHEFOliCAlILD,                                                              Orton wrote in his diay, "We sat talking of how happy we feIt. And how it
1613-1610
couldn't, surely, last. We'd have to pay for it. Or we'd be stuck down from
afar by disaster because we were, perhaps, too happy. To    be young, good­
looking, healthy, famous, comparatvely ric  and happy is surely going
against nature. "
Halliwell outwardly seemed as happy a s  Orton. Inwadly, though, he
was seething. And two months later, in the early moming of August 10,
E " \' \  TOH.IEyrS                                                                                                                                                                           1967, just days ater helping Orton put the finishing touces to the wiced
ACL"l HOS                                                                        fa'  ce                                                                        W                             t the Butler Saw (undoubtedly his masterpiece), Kenneth Halliwell
The goddess Minerva                                                                                                                                                                           bludgeoned Joe Orton to death with repeated blows of a h                    a   er to the
made her way to fhe                                                                                                                                                                           head. He then took tenty-one sleeping pills and died hirself, leaving be­
house of Envy, a house
hind a note that read, "If you read Orton's diary all will be explained."
filthy with dark and
noisome slime. It is
hidden away in the                                                               Interpretation
depths of the valleys,                                                           Kenneth Halliwell had tried to cast his deterioration as mental illness, but
where the sun never
                                                                                 what Joe Orton's diaries revealed to hir was the truth: It was envy, pure
penetrates, where no
wind blows through; a                                                            ad simple, that lay at the heart of his sickness. The diaries, which Halli­
gloomy dwelling,                                                                 weIl read on the sly, recounted the couple's days as equals and their st       g­
permeated by numbing
gle  for  recogniton.  Afer  Orton  found  success,  the  diaries  began  to
chili, ever fireless, ever
describe Halliwell's brooding, his rude comments at partes, his growing
shrouded in thick dark­
ness. When Minerva                                                               sense of inferiority. All of this Orton narated with a distace that bordered
reached this spot she                                                            on contempt.
stopped in front of the
The  diaries made  clear Halliwell's bittemess  over  Orton's  success.
house . . . and struck
Eventually the only thing that would have satisfied hir would have been
the doors with the tip
of her 'pear and at the                                                          for Orton to have a failure of his own, a unsuccessfl play perhaps, so that
hlow they flew open                                                              they could have commiserated in their failure, as they had done years be­
and revealed Envy
fore. When the opposite happened-as Orton grew only more successfl
within, husy at a meal
and popular-Halliwell did the only thing that would make them equals
of snake '.  jiesh, the
food on which she                                                                again: He made them equals in deat. With Orton's murder, he became a­
nourished her wicked­                                                            most as famous as his friend-posthumously.
ness. At the sight,
Joe Orton only partly understood his lover's deterioration. His attempt
Minerva turned her
to help Halliwell iaunch a career in at registered for what it was: charity
eyes away. But the
other rose heavily from                                                          and guilt.  Orton basically had two possible solutions to the problem. He
the ground, leaving the                                                          could have downplayed his own success, displaying some faults, deflecting
halfealen corpses, ami
Haliwell's envy; or, once he realized the nature of the problem, he could
came out with dragging
have fled as if Halliwell were a viper, as in fact he was-a viper of envy.
steps. When she saw the
goddess in all the bril­                                                         Once envy eats away at someone, ever                                           g you do only maes it grow,
liance ofher heauty, in                                                          and day by day it festers inside hir. Eventually he will attack.
herjashing arlOr, she
Only a minority can succeed at the game of life, and that minority in­
groaned
evitably arouses the envy of those around them.  Once success happens
Envy '.  face was sickly
pale, her whole hody                                                             your way, however, the people to fea the most are those in your own cir­
lean and wasted, and                                                             cle, the friends and acquaintaces you have lef behind. Feelings of inferi-
402                                                                              LAW 4 6

ority gnaw at them; the thought of your success only heightens their feel­      she squinted horrihly;
her teeth were disco 1-
ings of stagnation. Envy, which the philosopher Kierkegaard calls "un­
ored and decayed, her
happy admiration," takes hold. You may not see it but you will feel it
poisonous breast of a
someday-unless, that is, you leam stategies of deflection, litte sacrifices     greenish hue, and her
to the gods of success. Either dampen your brilliance occasionally, pur­        tongue dripped venom.
Only the sight of
poseflly revealing a defect, weakness, or anxiety, or attibuting your suc­
suffering could bring a
cess to luck; or simply find yourself new fiends. Never underestmate the
smile to her fips. She
power of envy.                                                                  never knew the comfort
of sleep, but was kept
constantly awake hy
care and anxiety,
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
looked with dismay on
The merchant dass and the craf guilds to which medieval Florence owed           men '. good fortune,
its prosperity had created a republic that protected them from oppression       and grew thin at the
                                                                                sight. Gnawing at
by the nobility. Since high office could only be held for a few months, no
                                                                                others, and heing
one could gain lasting dominance, and although this meant that the polit­       gnawed, she was herself
cal factions struggled constantly for control, the system kept out tyrats       her own torment.
and petty dictators. The Medici family lived for several centuries under this   Minerva, in spite of her
                                                                                loathing, yet addressed
system without making much of a mark. They had modest origins as
                                                                                her briejy: "Instill your
apotecaries, and were typical middle-dass citizens. Not until the late four­    poison into one of
teenth century, when Giovanni de' Medici made a modest fortune in bank­         Cecrop 's  daughters­
her name is Aglauros.
ing, did they emerge as a force to be reckoned with.
This is what I require
Upon Giovanni's death, his son Cosimo took over the family business,
ofyou. " Without
and quickly demonstrated his talent for it. The business prospered under        another word she
his control and the Medicis emerged as one of the preeminent banking            pushed against the
ground with her spear,
families of Europe. But they had a riya in Florence: Despite the city's re­
left the earth, and
publican system, one family, the Albizzis, had managed over the years to
soared upwards.
monopolize contol of the govemment, forging aliances that allowed them          From the corner of her
to constantly fill important offices with their own men. Cosimo did not         eye the other watched
the goddess out of
fight this, and in fact gave the Albizzis his tacit support. At the same tme,
sight, muttering and
while the Albizzis were beginning to flaunt their power, Cosimo made a
angry that Minerva 's
point of staying in the background.                                             plan should be success­
Eventually, however, the Medici wealth could not be ignored, ad in              fu!. Then she took her
staff all encircled with
1433, feeling threatened by the family, te Albizzis used their govemment
thory briars. wrapped
musde to have Cosimo arrested on charges of conspiring to overthrow the
herself in dark clouds,
republic. Some in the Albizzi faction wated Cosimo executed, others             and set forth. Wherever
feared this would spark a civil war. In the end they exiled hir fom Flo­        she went she trampled
down the jowery fields,
rence. Cosimo did not fight the sentence; he lef quietly. Sometimes, he
withered up the grass,
knew, it is wiser to bide one's tme and keep a low profile.
seared the treeto"s, and
Over the next yea, the Albizzis began to str up fears that they were            with her breath tainted
setting up a dictatorship. Meanwhile, Cosimo, using his wealth to advan­        the peoples, their cities
and their homes, until
tage, contnued to exert influence on Florentne affairs, even from exile. A
at length she came to
civil war broke out in the city, and in September of 1434 the Albizzis were
A thens, the hore of wit
toppled from power and sent into exile. Cosimo immediately retumed to           and wealth, peaceful
and prosperous. She
Florence, his position restored. But he saw that he now faced a delicate sit­
could scarcely refrain
uation: If he seemed ambitious, as the Albizzis had, he would stir up oppo­
from weeping when she
siton and envy that would ultmately threaten his business. If he stayed on
saw no cause for tears.
LAW 4 6                                                                         403

Then entering the                                                              the sidelines, o n  the other had, h e  would leave a opening for anoter
chamber of Cecrop 's
facton to rise up as the Albizzis had, and to punish the Medicis for their
daughter, she carried
success_
out Minerva 's orders.
She touched the girl 's                                                        Cosimo solved the problem in two ways: He secretly used his wealt
breast with a hand                                                             to buy influence among key citizens, and he placed his own allies, all dev­
dipped in malice, filled
erly enlisted from the middle dasses to disguise their allegiance to him, in
her heart with spiky
top goverment positons. Those who complained of his growing politcal
thorns, ami breathing
in a black ami evil                                                            dout were taxed into submission, or teir properties were bought out fom
poison dispersed it
under them by  Cosimo's  banker  allies. The republic survived in  name
through her very bones,
only. Cosimo held the stings.
instilling the venom
While he worked behind the scenes to gain control, however, publidy
deep in her heart. That
the reason for her                                                             Cosimo presented another picture. When he waked through the streets of
distress might not he                                                          F1orence, he dressed modestly, was attended by no more than one ser­
far to seek, she set
vant, and bowed deferentally to magistrates and eIder citizens. He rode a
helore Aglauros ' eyes a
vision of her sister, of                                                       mule instead of a horse. He never spoke out on matters of public import,
that sislers forlunale                                                         even though he controlled F1orence's foreign affairs for over thirty years.
marriage {with Ihe god
He gave money to charities ad maintained his tes to F1orence's merchant
MercuryI, ami of Ihe
dass.  He financed al kinds of public buildings that fed the F1orentines'
god in alt his hand­
someness; and she                                                              pride in their city. When he built a palace for hirself and his family in
exaggeraled Ihe glory                                                          nearby  Fiesoie,  he  tured down  te  orate  designs  that  Brunelleschi
ofit all.
had drawn up for hir and instead chose a modest structure designed by
So Aglauros was
Michelozzo, a ma of humble F10rentine origins. The paace was a symbol
tormenled hy such
Ih(ughls, and Ihe jeal-                                                        of Cosimo's stategy-al simplicity on the outside, al elegance ad opu­
ous anger she                                                                  lence within.
concealed ale inlo her
Cosimo finaly died in  1464, after ruling for thirty years. The citzens
hearl. Day and nighl
of F10rence wanted to build hir a great tomb, and to celebrate his memory
she sighed, uneeasingly
wrelched, and in her                                                           with elaborate fneral ceremonies, but on his deathbed he had asked to be
ulter misery wasted                                                            buried without  "ay  pomp  or demonstraton."  Some  sixt  yeas  later,
away in a slow decline,
Machiavelli haled Cosimo as the wisest of all princes, "for he knew how
as when iee is melted
extraordinary things that are seen ad appear every hour mae men much
by Ihe fil(ul sun.
The fire Ihal was                                                              more envied than those tat ae done in deed ad are covered over with
kindled within her al                                                          decency."
Ihe Ihoughl ofher
sislers fuck ami good
Interpretation
forlune was like the
buring of weeds                                                                A dose fiend of Cosimo's,  the bookseller Vespasiao  da Bistcci,  once
which do not bursl inlo                                                        wrote of hir, ''nd whenever he wished to achieve something, he saw to it,
flames, buI are none Ihe
in order to escape envy as much as possible, that the initatve appeaed to
less consumed by
come from others, and not fom hir." One of Cosimo's favorite expres­
smoldering fire.
METAMORPHOSES,                                                                 sions was, "Envy is a weed that should not be watered." Understanding the
OVID, 43 B.C".-C. A.D. 18                                                      power envy has in a democratc environment, Cosimo avoided te appea­
ance of greatess. This does not mea tat greatess should be suffocated,
or that only te mediocre should survive; only tat a game of appearances
must be played. The insidious envy of the masses ca actualy be deflected
quite easily: Appear as one of tem in style and vaues. Make aliaces wit
those  below you, and elevate tem to positons of power to secure their
support in times of need. Never flaunt your wealth, and careflly concea
404                                                                            LAW 4 6

the degree to which it has bought influence. Make a display of deferring to
others, as i they were more powerfl than you. Cosimo de' Medici per­
The envious hides as
fected this game; he was a consummate con artst of appearances. No one
carefully lIS the secret,
could gauge the extent of his power-his modest exterior hid the tuth.            lustful sinner lnd
Never be so foolish as to believe that you are strring up admiration by          becomes Ihe endless
                                                                                 inventor of tricks and
flauntng the quaites that raise you above oters. By maing others aware
                                                                                 strlilgems 10 hide and
of their inferior positon, you are only strring up "unhappy admiraton," or       mask himself Thus he
envy, which will gnaw away at them untl they undermine you in ways you           is able to pretend to
cannot foresee. The fool dares the gods of envy by flauntng his victories.       ignore the superiority
of others which eats up
The master of power understands tat te appearance of superiority over
his heart, as if he <lid
others is inconsequental next to the reality of it.
not see them, nor helr
them, nor were aWllre
of them, nor hat ever
Of al the disorders of the soul, envy is the only one no one confesses to.
heard of them. Ile is 1
Plutarch, c. A . l .   46- 1 20
master simulator. On
the other hllnd he tries
with all his power to
connive lnd thus
KEYS TO POWER
prevent lny form of
The human aima has a had time dealing with feelings of inferiority. In
superiority from
the face of superior skill, taent, or power, we are ofen disturbed and ill at    appearing in any situa­
ease; this is  because most of us  have an inflated sense of ourselves, and      tion. And if they do, he
casts on them obscu­
when we meet people who surpass us they mae it dea to us tat we ae in
rity, hypercriticism,
fact mediocre, or at least not as brilliant as we had tought. This distur­
sarcasm and calumny
bance in our self-image cannot last long without strring up ugly emotons.        like Ihe load that spils
At first we feel envy: If only we had the quait or skill of the superior per­    poison from its hole.
On the other hand he
son, we would be happy. But envy brings us neither comfort nor any doser
will raise endlessly
to equality. Nor can we admit to feeling it, for it is fowned upon socially­
insignijcant men,
to show envy is to admit to feeling inferior. To dose fiends, we may con­        mediocre people, and
fess our secret unrealized desires, but we will never confess to feeling envy.   even the inferior in the
same type ofactivilies.
So it goes underground. We disguise it in many ways, like finding grounds
ARTHUR
to critcize the person who maes us feel it: He may be smater tan I               a,
SCHOPENIAUER.
we say, but he ha no morals or conscience. Or he may have more power,            1788-1860
but that's because he cheats. If we do not slander hir, perhaps we praise
hir excessively-another of envy's disguises.
There are several stategies for dealing with the insidious, dest                 ctve
emoton of envy. First, accept the fact tat there will be people who will         For not many men, the
proverb says, call love a
surpas you in some way, and also te fact that you may envy tem. But
friend who fortune
mae that feeling a way of pushing yourself to equa or surpass thr some­
prospers wilhout feel­
day. Let envy tr inward and it poisons the soul; expel it outwad and it          ing envy; and about the
can move you to greater heights.                                                 envious brain, cold
poison clings and
Second, understand that as you gain power, tose below you will feel
doubles all the pain fife
envious of you. They may not show it but it is inevitable. Do not naively ac­
brings him. His own
cept the facade they show you-read between the lines of their critcisms,         woundings he must
their little sarcastc remaks, the signs of bacstabbing, te excessive praise      nurse, and feels
another's gladness
that is preparing you for a fall, the resent                                     l look in the eye. Half the prob­
like a curse.
lem with envy comes when we do not recognize it untl it is too late.
AESCHYLlJS.
Finally, expect tat when people envy you they will work against you              c. 525-456 B.C.
LAW 46                                                                           405

insidiously. They will put obstacles in your path that you will not foresee,
or that you cannot tace to their source. It is hard to defend yourself against
S I' , I' I I                                                                    ,\ \ / )  I I I S  C O A T
this kind of attack. And by the time you realize that envy is at the root of a
Now Israel loved
person's feelings about you, it is ofen too late: Your excuses, your false hu­
Joseph more than all
mility, your defensive actons, only exacerbate the problem. Since it is far
his children, heeause he
was the son ofhis old                                                            easier to avoid creating envy in the first place than to get rid of it once it is
age; and he made hirn a                                                          there, you should strategize to forestall it before it grows. It is ofen your
coat ofmany colors.
own actions that stir up envy, your own unawareness. By becoming con­
And his hrothers
scious of those actons and qualities that create envy, you can take the teeth
envied hirn                                                                      A mi
when they saw hir afar                                                                                                                                               out of it before it nibbles you to death.
off they conspired                                                                                                                                                   Kierkegaard believed that there are types of people who create envy,
against hir to slay
                                                                                                                                                                     and are as guilty when it arises as those who feel it. The most obvious type
hir. And now they said
{o one another,                                                                                                                                                      we all know: The moment something good happens to them, whether by
"Behold, this dreamer                                                                                                                                                luck or design, they crow about it. In fact they get pleasure out of making
cometh. Come now
people feel inferior. This type is obvious and beyond hope. There are oth­
therefore, and let IS
ers, however, who stir up envy in more subtle and unconscious ways, and
slay hirn, and cast hir
are partly to blame for their toubles. Envy is ofen a problem, for exam­
into some pit, and we
shall say, some evil                                                             pIe, for people with great natural talent.
beast hafh devol1red
Sir Water Raeigh was one of the most brilliant men at the court of
hir; and we shall see
Queen Elizabeth of England. He had skills as a scientst, wrote poety still
whaf will hecome ofhis
dreams. "                                                                        recognized as among the most beautl writing of the time, was a proven
OLD TESTAMENT,                                                                   leader of men, an enterprising entepreneur, a great sea captain, and on
GENESIS 37:3-20
top of all this was a handsome, dashing courter who camed his way into
becoming one of the queen's favorites. Wherever he went, however, peo­
pIe bloced his path. Eventually he suffered a terrific fall from grace, lead­
ing even to prison and finally the executioner's axe.
Raleigh could not understad the stubbom opposition he faced fom
the other courtiers. He did not see that he had not only made no attempt to
T 1 1,: T H A C E I l \                                                          disguise the degree of his skills and qualites, he had imposed them on one
OF '1' 1 11·:  T()\l B                                                           and all, making a show of his versatlity, thinking it impressed people and
[When Pope Julius first                                                          won hir friends. In fact it made hir silent enemies, people who feIt infe­
saw Michelangelo 's                                                              rior to hir and did all they could to ruin hir the moment he tripped up or
design .{Jr his tomh/ it
made the slightest mistake. In the end, the reason he was executed was
pleased hirn so much
teason, but envy will use any cover it finds to mask its destructiveness.
thaf he at once senf hir
to Carrara fo quarry                                                             The envy elicited by Sir WaIter Raleigh is the worst kind: It was in­
the necessary marh/es,                                                           spired by his natural talent and grace, whic he feIt was best displayed in
instructing Alamanno
its fll flower. Money others ca attain; power as weIl. But superior intelli­
Salviati, ofFlorence, to
gence, good looks, charm-these are qualities no one can acquire. The nat­
pay hir a thousand
ducats for this purpose.                                                         uraly perfeet have to work the most to disguise their brilliance, displaying
Michelangelo stayed in                                                           a defeet or two to deflect envy before it taes root. It is a common and
these mountains more
naive mistake to think you are carming people with your natural talents
than eight months with
when in fact they ae coming to hate you.
two workmen and his
horse, and without any                                                           A great danger in the realm ofpower is the sudden improvement in for­
other provision except                                                           tune-an unexpected promoton, a victory or success that seems to come
food. , , . Enough
out of nowhere. This is sure to stir up envy among your former peers.
marh/es quarried and
When Archbishop de Retz was promoted to the rank of cardinal, in
chosen, he took them to
                                                                                 the sea-coast, and left                                                             1651, he knew f weIl that many of his former colleagues envied hir.
406                                                                              LAW 46

Understanding the foolishness of alienatng those below hir, de Retz did            one ofhis men to have
them embarked. He
everything he could to downplay his merit and emphasize the role of luck
himself retured to
in his success. To  put people at ease, he acted humbly and deferentally, as i
Rome.
nothing had changed. (In reality, of course, he now had much more power            . . . The quantity of
than before.) He wrote that these wise policies "produced a good effect, by        marbles was immense,
so that, spread over the
lessening the envy which was conceived against me, which is the greatest of
piazza, they were the
al secrets." Follow de Retz's exaple. Subtly emphasize how lucky you
admiration of all and a
have been, to make your happiness seem more attainable to other people,            joy to the pope, who
and the need for envy less acute. But be carefl not to aect a fase modesty         heaped immeasurable
                                                                                   favors upon Michelan­
that people can easily see through. This will only make them more envious.
                                                                                   gelo; and when he
The act has to be good; your humility, ad your openness to those you have          began to work upon
lef behind, have to seem genuine. Any hint of insincerity will only make           them again and again
went to see him at his
your new status more oppressive. Remember: Despite your elevated posi­
house, and talked to
ton, it will do you no good to alienate your former peers. Power requires a
him about the tomb
wide ad solid support base, which envy can silently destoy.                        and other things as
Political power of any kind creates envy, ad one of the best ways to               with his own brather.
And in order that he
deflect it before it takes root is to seem unambitous. When Ivan the Terri­
might more easily go to
ble died, Boris Godunov knew he was the only one on the scene who could
him, the pope ordered
lead Russia. But if he sought the positon eagerly, he would stir up envy           that a drawbridge
ad suspicion among the boyars, so he refsed the crown, not once but                should be thrown
across fram the Corri­
several times. He made people insist that he take te trone. George Wash­
dore to the raoms of
ington used the same strategy to great effect, first in refusing to keep the po­
Michelangelo, by which
sition of Commander in Chief of the American army, second in resisting             he might visit him in
the presidency. In both cases he made hirself more popular than ever.              private.
These many and
People cannot envy the power that they themselves have given a person
frequent favors were
who does not seem to desire it.
the cause (as often is
According to the Elizabethan statesman and writer Sir Francis Bacon,               the case at court) of
the wisest policy of the powerfl is to create a kind of pity for themselves,       much envy, and, after
the envy, of endless
as i their responsibilities were a burden and a sacrifice. How can one envy
persecution, since
a man who has taken on a heavy load for te public interest? Disguise your
Bramante, the architect,
power as a kind of self-sacrifice rather tha a source of happiness ad you          who was loved hy the
make it seem less enviable. Emphasize your troubles and you tur a poten­           pope, made him change
his mind as to the
tial danger (envy) into a source of moral support (pity). A similar ploy is to
monument hy te/Ung
hint that your good fortune will benefit those aound you. To   do this you
him, as is said by the
may need to open your purse stings, like Cimon, a wealthy general in a­            vulgar, that it is
cient Athens who gave lavishly in al kinds of ways to prevent people fom           unlucky to build one's
tomh in one's lifetime,
resenting the influence he had bought in Athenian politics. He paid a high
and other tales. Fear as
price to deflect their envy, but in the end it saved hir from ostacism and
welt as envy stimulated
banishment fom the city.                                                                                    Bramante, for the judg­
The painter J. M. W. Turer devised another way of giving to deflect                ment of Michelangelo
                                                                                   had exposed many of
the envy of his fellow artsts, which he recognized as his greatest obstacle to
                                                                                   his errars               Now
his success. Noticing that his incompaable color skills made them afaid to         because he had no
hang their paintings next to his in exhibitions, he realized that their fear       douht that Michelan­
would tur to envy, and would eventualy make it harder for hir to find              gelo knew these errars
                                                                                                            of his, he always sought
galleries to show in. On occasion, then, Turer is known to have tempora­
                                                                                   t remove him from
ily dampened the colors in his paintngs with soot to ea hir the goodwill           Rome, or, at least, to
of his colleagues.                                                                 deprive him ofthe
                                                                                   LAW 46                   407

favor ofthe pope, and                                                            To     deflect  envy,  Graciän  recommends that the  powerfl  display  a
ofthe glory and useful­
weakness, a minor social indiscreton, a harmless vice. Give those who
ness that he might have
envy you something to feed on, distactng tem fom your more impor­
acquired by his indus­
try. He sllcceeded in the                                                        tant sins. Remember: It is the reaity that matters. You may have to play
matter of the 10mb.                                                              games wit appearaces, but in the end you will have what counts: tue
There is no doubt that
power. In some Arab counties, a man will avoid arousing envy by doing
ifMichelangelo had
as Cosimo de Medici did by showing his weath only on the inside of his
been allowed to finish
it, according to his first                                                       house. Apply this wisdom to your own character.
design, having so large                                                          Beware of some of envy's disguises. Excessive praise is a almost sure
a field in which to show
sign tat the person praising you envies you; they are either settng you up
his worth, no other
for a fall-it will be impossible for you to live up to their praise-or tey
artist, however cele­
brated (be it said with-                                                         are sharpening their blades behind your back. At the same tme, those who
out envy) could have                                                             are hypercritcal of you, or who slander you publicly, probably envy you
wrested from hir the
as weIl. Recognize their behavior as disguised envy ad you keep out of
high place he would
the tap of mutual mud-slinging, or of taking their critcisms to heart.           Wn
have held.
VITA DI MICHELANGELO,                                                            your revenge by ignoring their measly presence.
ASCANIO CONDIVI,                                                                 Do not ty to help or do favors for those who envy you; they will tn
1553
you are condescending to tem. Joe Orton's attempt to help Halliwell find
a gallery for his work only intensified his lover's feelings of inferiorit and
envy. Once envy reveals itself for what it is, the only soluton is ofen to
flee the presence of the enviers, leaving them to stew in a hell of teir own
creaton.
Finally, be aware that some environments are more conducive to envy
Did ever anybody seri­                                                                                                                                       than others. The effects of envy are more serious among colleagues ad
ously confess to envy?
                                                                                                                                                             peers, where there is a veneer of equaity. Envy is also destuctve in demo­
Something there is in it
universally feit to be                                                                                                                                       cratc environments where overt displays of power are looked down upon.
more shameful than                                                                                                                                           Be extasensitve in such environments. The filmmaer Ingmar Bergman
even felonious crime.                                                            was hounded by Swedish                                                      t                                                                            autorites because he stood out in a county
And not only does
where standing out fom the crowd is frowned on. It is almost impossible
everybody disown it,
to avoid envy in such caes, and there is little you can do but accept it gra­
but the better sort are
inclined to incredulity                                                          ciously and take none of it personally. As Thoreau once said, "Envy is te
when it is in earnest
tax which all distncton must pay.»
imputed 10 an intelli­
gent man. But since
ludgment is in the heart
not the brain, no degree
uf intellect supplies a
guarantee against it.
Garden of Weeds. You may not                                                     Image: A
BII.LY BUDD,
HERMAN MELVILLE.                                                                 feed them but they spread as you water
18 19-1891
the garden. You may not see how, but
they take over, taU and ugly, pre­
venting anything beautiful from
flourishing. Before it is too late,
do  not water  indiscrimi-
nately. Destroy the weeds
of envy by giving them
nothing to feed on.
408                                                                              LAW 46

Authority : Upon occasion, reveal a harmless defect in YOUf charac­
ter. For the envious accuse the most perfeet of sinning by having no
Know how to triumph
sins. They become an  Argus,  all  eyes  for finding fault with  excel­
over envy and malice.
lence-it is their only consolation. Do not let envy burst with its own        Here contempt,
venom-affect some  lapse in  valor  or intellect,  so as to  dis arm  it      although prudent,
counts, indeed, for
beforehand. You thus wave YOUf red cape before the Horns of Envy,
little; magnanimity is
in  order  to  save  YOUf immortality.  (Baltasar  Graciän,                   1601-1658)                  better. A good word
concerning one who
speaks evil ofyou
cannot be praised too
highly: there is no
revenge more heroie
than that broughl
REVERSAL                                                                      about by those merits
The reason for being caefl with the envious is that tey are so indirect,      and attainments which
frustrate and torment
ad will find innumerable ways to undermine you. But treading careflly
the envious. Every
aound tem will ofen only mae their envy worse. They sense that you
stroke of good fortune
ae being cautous, ad it registers as yet aother sign of YOUf superiority.     is a further twisl ofthe
That is why you must act before envy takes root.                              rope round the neck of
the ill-disposed and the
Once envy is there, however, wheter through YOUf fault or not, it is
heaven of the envied is
sometmes best to affect the opposite approach: Display the ut                 ost disdain
hell for the envious. To
for those who envy you. Instead of hiding YOUf perfection, make it obvi­      convert your good
ous. Make every new tiumph an opportunity to make the envious squirm.         fortune into poison for
your enemies is held to
YOUf good fortune ad power become their living hell. If you .attain a posi­
be the most severe
ton of unimpeachable power, their envy will have no effect on you, and
punishment you can
you will have the best revenge of a: They are trapped i envy while you        inflict on Ihem. The
ae fee in YOUf power.                                                         envious man dies not
only once but as many
This is  how  Michelangelo  triumphed  over the venomous  architect
times as Ihe person he
Bramante, who tured Pope Julius against Michelangelo's design for his
envies lives 10 hear the
tomb. Bramante envied Michelangelo's godlike skills, ad to this one ti­       voice of praise; the
umph-the aborted tomb project-he thought to add aother, by pushing            eternity of the latters
fame is the measure of
te pope to commission Michelangelo to paint te mUfals in te Sistne
the former's punish­
Chapel. The project would take years, during which Michelangelo would
menl: the one is immor­
accomplish no  more  of his brilliant  sculptures.  Furtermore,  Bramante     tal in his glory, the
considered Michelangelo not nearly as skilled in paintng as in sculpture.     latter in his misery. The
trumpet offame which
The chapel would spoil his image as the perfect artist.
sounds immortality for
Michelangelo saw te tap and wanted to tur down the commission,
the one heraids death
but he could not refse the  pope,  so he accepted it without complaint.       for the other, who is
Then, however, he used Bramate's env to SPuf hir to greater heights,          sentenced to be choked
to death on his own
maing the Sistine Chapel his most perfect work of all. Every tme Bra­
en vy.
mate heard of it or saw it, he feit more oppressed by his own envy-the
BALASAR GRACIAN,
sweetest and most lastng revenge you can exact on the envious.                1601-1658
LAW 46                                                                        409

LAW
47
D O  NOT  GO PAST  THE
MARK Y OU AI MED F OR ;
IN VICTORY ,
LEARN WHEN TO STO P
JUDGMENT
The moment oJ   victory is often the moment oJ greatest
petil. In the heat oJ   victor, arr                         nce and overcor­
dence can push you past the goal you had aimed Jor and
by  going too Jar you make more enemies than you deeat.
Do not allow success to go to your head. There is no sub­
stituteJor strateg and careul planning. Set a goal, and
when you reach it, sto.
410

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In 559 B.C., a young man named Cyrus gathered an immense amy fom
TIIE V\I\CU)HIOI ,
te scattered tribes of Persia ad mached against his grandfather Astyages,
C()Cld':HLL
king of the Medes. He defeated Astyages with ease, had himself crowned
Two cockerels foughl
king of Medea ad Persia, and began to forge te Persia Empire. Victory
on a dungheap. One
                                                                                followed  victory  in  quick  succession.  Cyrus  defeated  Croesus,  ruler  of   cockerel was the
                                                                                Lydia, then conquered the Ionia islands and other smaler kingdoms; he             stronger: he
                                                                                                                                                                  vanquished the other
                                                                                mached on Babyion and crushed it.  Now he was known as Cyrus te
                                                                                                                                                                  and drove hir frum
Great,                                                                          Kg of te World.                                                                   Ihe dungheap.
                                                                                Mter captuing the riches of Babyion, Cyrus set his sights on te eat,              All the hens gathered
                                                                                on the half-barbaric tibes of the Massagetai, a vast realm on te Caspian          around the cockerel,
and began to laud hir.
Sea. A fierce warior race led by Queen Tomyris, the Massagetai laced the
The cockerel wanted
riches of Babyion,  but Cyrus  decided to attack them anyway, believing
his strength and glory
himself superhuman and incapable of defeat. The Massagetai would fall           tu be known in the next
yard. He jew on top of
easily to his vat armies, making his empire immense.
the barn, japped his
In 529 B.C., then, Cyrus marched to the wide river Araxes, gateway to
wings, and crowed in a
the kingdom of the Masagetai. As he set up camp on the wester bank, he          loud voice: "Look at
received a message fom Queen Tomyris: "King of te Medes," she told              me, all ofyou. I am a
victorious cockerel.
hi                                                                              , "I advise you to abandon this enterprise, for you cannot know if in the
No other cockerel in
end it will do you any good. Rule yoUf own people, and try to bear the
the world ha" such
sight of me ruling mine. But of course you will refuse my advice, as te last    strength as I "
ting you wish for is to live in peace." Tomyris, confident of her               ay's                                                                              The cockerel had not
jinished, when an eagle
stength and not wishing to delay te inevitable batte, offered to withdraw
killed hir, seized hir
the troops on her side of the river, alowing                                    Cs to cross its waters saely
in his claws, and
and fight her army on te easter side, if tat was his desire.                    carried hir to his nest.
Cyrus agreed, but instead of engaging te enemy directy he decided               fABIES,
LEO TOlSTOY,
to play a trick. The Massagetai knew few luxuries. Once Cyrus had crossed
1 828-19 1 0
the river and made his camp on the easter side, he set the table for an
elaborate banquet,                                                              f                                                                                 of meat, delicacies, and strong wine. Then he left
his weakest troops in the camp and witdrew te rest of the amy to te
river. A large Massageta detachment soon attacked te ca                         p and kled all
of te Persian soldiers in a fierce battle. Then, overwhelmed by te fabu­
lous feast that had been left behind, they ate and drank to teir hearts' con­
tent. Later, inevitably, they fell asleep. The Persian army retured to te
camp that night, killing many of the sleeping soldiers and capturing te
rest. Among the prisoners wa teir general, a yout named Spargapises,
son of Queen Tomyris.
When te queen learned what had happened, she sent a message to
Cyrus, chi ding him for using tricks to defeat her army. "Now listen to me,"
she wrote, "and I will advise you for YOUf own good: Give me bac my son
and leave my country with YOUf forces intact, and be content with yoUf ti­
umph over a tird pat of the Massagetai. If you refse, I swear by the sun
our master to give you more blood than you can dn for al your glut­
tony. " Cyrus scoffed at her: He would not release her son. He would crush
these barbarians.
The queen' s son, seeing he would not be released, could not stad the
LAW 47                                                                          411

humiliaton, ad SO he killed himself. The news of her son's death over­
whelmed Tomyris. She gathered all the forces that she could muster in her
'1'1 11,.                                                                     :i 1 . ()1 F \ < : I':                                                           01
kingdom, and whipping them into a vengefl frenzy, engaged Crus's
< . IWSS-F\ \\1I\.\rIO'
toops in a violent and bloody battle. Finally, te Masagetai prevailed. In
In all y o u r  eross­
their anger they decimated the Persian army, killing Cyrus himself.
t'xaminations .                                                               •   nUJsl
important oj' all, let me                                                                                                                                      Afer the battle, Tomyris and her soldiers seached the battlefield for
repeat the injunetion /0                                                                                                                                       Cyrus's corpse. When she found it she cut off his head and shoved it into a
he ever on Ihe alerl !{)r
                                                                                                                                                               wineskin fll of human blood, crying out, "Though I have conquered you
a good plaee to stop.
NOlhing ean he more                                                                                                                                            and live, yet you have ruined me by teacerously taking my son. See
imporlant Ihan 10 c!ose                                                                                                                                        now-I flfill my threat: You have your fill of blood." Afer Cyrus's death,
your exanlination with                                                                                                                                         the Persian Empire quickly unraveled. One act of arrogance undid all of
a Iriumph. So manv
Cyrus's good work.
lawyers suceeed in
catehing a witness in a
serious contradiction;                                                        Interpretation
hut, not salisjiet! with
There is nothing more intoxicatng than victory, and nothing more dan­
Ihis, go on asking ques-
gerous.
lions, and laper off
their examinalion until                                                       Cyrus had built his great empire on the ruins of a previous one. A hun­
the effeel upon Ihe jury                                                      dred years earlier, the powerfl Assyria Empire had been totaly de­
of theirformer advan-                                                         stoyed, its once splendid capital of Nineveh but ruins in the sand. The
tage is lost a!together.
                                                                              Assyrians had suffered this fate because they had pushed too far, destoy­
THE ART O   CROSS­
EXAMINATION.                                                                  ing one city-state after another untl they lost sight of the purposes of their
FRANClS L. WH.LMAN.                                                           victories, and also of the costs. They overextended themselves and made
1913
many enemies who were finally able to band togeter and destoy them.
Cyrus ignored the lesson of Assyria. He paid no heed to the waings
of oracles and advisers. He did not worry about offending a queen. His
many victories had gone to his head, clouding his reason. Instead of con­
solidatng his already vast empire, he pushed forward. Instead of recogniz­
'1'1 11-:                                                                     01 1·:11 11 1·:·1<:1 1 1 \( ,                                                    ing each situation as different, he thought eac new war would bring the
                                                                              CF \1·:11 1 I .                                                                  sae result as the one before as long a he used the methods he knew:
                                                                              We  read of many                                                                 ruthless force and cunning.
ins/ances of Ihis kind;                                                                                                                                        Understand: In the realm of power, you must be guided by reason. To
.f(H Ihe general who hv
let a momentary thrill or an emotonal victory influence or guide yOUf
his valor Iws
moves will prove fatal. When you attain success, step back. Be cautous.
conqueret! a stale for
his master, and won                                                           When you gain victory, understand the part played by the pacula cir­
great glory j(Jr himself                                                      cumstances of a situaton, and never simply repeat the sae actons agan
hy his victory over Ihe
and again. History is littered with the ruins of victorious empires and the
enemy, and has loaded
corpses of leaders who could not lea to stop and consolidate their gains.
his soldiers wilh rieh
hooly. aequires neces-
sari/v wilh his mvn
soldiers, as weil as wirh
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Ihose of Ihe enemy ami
with the suhjecls of Ihe                                                      No single person in history has occupied a more delicate and precarious
prinee, so high a repu-                                                       positon than the king's mistess. She had no real or legitmate power base
talion. that his very                                                         to fall back on in tmes of touble; she was sUITounded by packs of envious
victory mlY become
                                                                              courters eagerly antcipating her fall fom grace; and finally, since the
distasteful, and a Clluse
for apprehension to his                                                       source of her power was usually her physical beauty, for most royal mis­
princc. For as the                                                            tresses that fall wa inevitable and unpleaant.
412                                                                           LAW 47

King Louis XV of Frace began to keep official mistresses in the ealy         nature of men is ambi­
lious as weil as suspi­
days of his reign, each woman's good fortne rarely lastng more than a
cious. and puts no
few years. But ten came Madame de Pompadour, who, when she was a
limits to one 's good
middle-elass child of nine named Jeanne Poisson, had been told by a for­     fortune, it is not impos­
tune-teller tat she would someday be te king's favorite. This seemed an      sible that the suspieion
                                                                             that may suddenly be
absurd dream, since the royal mistess almost always came from the aris­
                                                                             aroused in the mind oI
tocracy. Jeanne nevertheless believed herself destined to seduce the king,   fhe prince by the
and doing so became her obsession. She applied herself to the talents te     victory of the general
king's favorite had to have-music, dancing, acting, horseback riding­        may have been aggra­
                                                                             vated by some haughty
and she excelled in every one of them. As a young woman, she married a
                                                                             expressions or insolent
man of the lower nobility, which gave her an entree to the best salons in    acts on his part; so that
Paris. Word quickly spread of her beauty, talent, carm, and intelligence.    the prince will nallt­
rally be made to think
Jeanne Poisson became elose fiends wit Voltare, Montesquieu, and
ofsecuring himself
other great minds of te time, but she never lost sight of te goal she had
against the ambition of
set herself as a girl: to capture the heart of the king. Her husbad had a    h is general.
chäteau in a forest where the king would ofen go huntng, and she began       And to do this, the
means that suggest
to  spend a lot of time there. Studying his movements like a hawk, she
themselves to him are
would make sure he would "happen" to come upon her while she was out
either to have the
walking in her most aluring dress, or riding in her splendid coac. The       general killcd. or to
king began to tae note of her, making her gifts of te game he caught in      deprive him of that
reputation which he
the hunt.
has acquired wilh the
In 1744 Louis's current mistess, the Duchesse de Chäteauroux, died.
prirlce 's  anny and the
Jeanne went on the offensive. She placed herself everywhere he would be:     people, by using every
at masked balls at Versailles, at the opera, wherever their paths would      means to prove that the
genera/'s victory was
cross, and wherever she could display her may talents: dancing, singing,
not due to his skill allli
riding, coquetry. The king finally succumbed to her charms, and in a cere­
courage, but to chance
mony at Versailles in September of 1745, this twenty-four-year-old daugh­    and the cowardice of
ter of a middle-elass baking agent was officially inaugurated as te king's   the enemy, or to the
sagacity of the other
mistress. She was given her own room in the palace, a room te king could
captains who were with
enter at any time via a hidden stairway and bac door. And because some
him in that action.
of the courters were angry that he had chosen a woman of low origins, he
NICCOLÖ MACHIAVELLI .
made her a marquise. From now on she would be known as Madame de             1 469- 1 5 27
Pompadour.
The king was a man whom the slightest feeling of boredom would op­
press out of proportion. Madame de Pompadour knew that keeping hir
under her spell meant keeping hir amused. To   that end she put on con­
stat theatrical productons at Versailles, in which she stared. She orga­
nized elaborate huntng parties, masked balls, and whatever else it would
tae to keep hir diverted outside the bedroom. She became a patroness of
the                                                                          a                           , and the arbiter of taste and fashion for al of Frace. Her enemies
at te court only grew in number with each new success, but Madame de
Pompadour thwated tem in a totaly novel way for a king's mistress: with
exteme politeness. Snobs who resented her for her low birth she won over
with charm and grace. Most unusual of a, she befiended the queen, and
insisted tat Louis XV pay more attenton to his wife, and teat her more
kindly. Even the royal family begrudgingly gave her teir support. To
LAW 47                                                                       413

crown her glory, the king made her a duchess. Her sway was feIt even in
politcs: Indeed she became the untitled minister of foreign affairs.
A man who was
In 1751, when Mada                                                              e de Pompadour was at the height of her power,
jilOus as a tree
climber was fuidinf                                                             she experienced her worst crisis. Physically weakened by the responsibili­
someone in climbinf a                                                           ties of her position, she found it increasingly difficuIt to meet the king's de­
tal! tree. He ordered the
mands in bed. This was usualy the point at which the mistess would meet
man to cut the top
her  end,  stuggling to  maintain  her position as her beauty  faded.  But
branche." and, durinf
this time, when the man                                                         Madame de Pompadour had a stategy: She encouraged the king to set up
seemed to be in freat                                                           a kind of brothel, Pac aux Cerfs, on the grounds of Versailles. There the
danger, the expert said
middle-aged king could have liaisons with the most beautifl young girls in
nothing. Only when the
the realm.
man was coming down
and had reaehed the                                                             Madame de Pompadour knew that her carm and her politcal acu­
height of the eaves did                                                         men had made her indispensable to the king. What did she have to fear
the expert cal! out, "Be
fom a sixteen-year-old who  had none of her power and presence? What
earefu!! Wateh your
did it matter if she  lost  her positon in the bedroom, as long as  she  re­
step eoming down ! "  I
asked him, "Why did                                                             mained the most powerfl woman in France? To    secure that positon she
you .my that? At that
became still closer friends with the queen, with whom she stated attending
height he could jump
church. Although her enemies at the court conspired to have her toppled
the rest of the way if he
chose. "                                                                        from her official positon as king's mistress, the king kept her on, for he
" That's the point, " said                                                      needed  her calming effect. It was only when her part in te disastrous
the expert. "As long as                                                         Seven Years' War drew much criticism on her that she slowly withdrew
the man was up at a
from public affairs.
dizzy heifht and the
branches were threat-                                                           Madame de Pompadour's health had always been delicate, and she
ening to break, he                                                              died at the age of forty-three, in 1764. Her reign as mistess had lasted an
himself was so afraid I
unprecedented twenty years. "She was regretted by all," wrote the Duc de
said nothing. Mistakes
Croy, "for she was kindly and helpfl to everyone who approached her."
are always made when
people get to th e easy
plaees. "                                                                       Interpretation
This man be/onfed to
Aware of the temporariness of her power, the king's mistess would ofen
the /owest dass, but his
go into a kind of frenzy after capturing the king: She would try to accumu­
words were in perfeet
aecord wilh the                                                                 late as much money as possible to protect her after her inevitable fall. And
precepts of the sages. In                                                       to extend her reign as long as possible, she would be ruthless with her ene­
ftbal! too. they say
mies in the court. Her situaton, in other words, seemed to demand fom
that after you have
her a greed and vindictveness that would ofen be her undoing. Madame
kicked out ofa dijJicult
plan, and you think the                                                         de Pompadour succeeded where al others had failed because she never
next one will be easier                                                         pressed her good fortune. Instead of bullying the courters fom her power­
YOl are sure to miss the
fl positon as the king's mistess, she tied to win teir support. She never
ball.
revealed  the  slightest hint  of greed  or  arrogance.  When  she  could  no
ESSAYS IN IDLFNFSS,
KENKÖ.                                                                          longer perform  her  physical  duties  as  mistess,  she  did  not  fret at the
JAPAN,
thought of someone replacing her in bed. She simply applied some strat­
FOlJRTEENTH CENTlJRY
egy-she  encouraged  the  king  to  take  young lovers,  knowing  that  the
younger and pretter they were, the less of a threat they posed, since they
could not compare to  her  in charm  ad sophistcation ad would soon
bore the monarch.
Success plays stange ticks on the mind. It makes you feel invulnera­
ble, while also making you more hostle and emotona when people chal-
414                                                                             LAW 47

lenge your power. It makes you less able to adapt to circumstance. You
come to believe your character is more responsible for your success than
your stategizing and planning. Like Madame de Pompadour, you need to
realize that your moment of triumph is also a moment when you have to
rely on cunning and stategy all the more, consolidating your power base,
recognizing the role of luck and circumstance in your success, and remain­
ing vigilant aganst changes in your good fortune. It is the moment of vic­
tory when you need to play the  courter's ga                                     e and pay more attention
than ever to the laws of power.
The geatest danger occurs at the moment 0/ victory.
Napoleon Bonaparte, 1 76 9- 1 82 1
KEYS TO POWER
Power has its own rhythms ad patters. Those who succeed at the game
are the ones who contol the patters and vary them at will, keeping peo­
pIe off balance while they set the tempo. The essence of strategy is control­
ling what comes next, and the elation of victory can upset your abilit to
control what comes next in two ways. First, you owe your success to a pat­
ter tat you are apt to try to repeat. You will try to keep moving in the
sa                                                                               e direction without stopping to see whether this is still the direction that
is best for you. Second, success tends to go to your head and make you
emotonal.  Feeling  invulnerable,  you  make  aggressive  moves  that  ult­
mately undo the victory you have gained.
The lesson is simple: The powernd vary teir rhythms and patters,
change course, adapt to circumstace, and leam to improvise. Rather than
letting their dancing feet impel them forward,  they  step  bac and look
where they are going. It is as if their bloodstream bore a kind of antidote to
the intoxication of victory, letting them control teir emotons and come to
a kind of mental halt when they have attained success. They steady them­
selves, give themselves the space to reflect on what has happened, examine
the role of circumstance and luck in their success. As they say in riding
school, you have to be able to control yourself before you can control the
horse.
Luck and circumstance always play a role in power. This is inevitable,
and actually maes the game more interestng. But despite what you may
think, good luck is more dangerous than bad luck. Bad luck teaches valu­
able lessons about patience, timing, and te need to be prepared for the
worst; good luck deludes you into the opposite lesson, making you think
your brillliance will carry you through. Your fortune will inevitably tur,
and when it does you will be completely unprepaed.
According to Machiavelli, this is what undid Cesare Borgia. He had
many triumphs, was actually a clever strategist, but had the bad luc to
have good luck: He had a pope for a father. Then, when he had bad luck
for real-his father's death-he was unprepared for it, and the many ene-
LAW 4 7                                                                          415

mies he had made devoured him. The good luck that elevates you or seals
your success brings the moment for you to open your eyes: The wheel of
fortune                                                                         w                                                     hurtle you down as easily as up. If you prepare for the fall, it is
less likely to ruin you when it happens.
People who have a run of success can catch a kind of fever, and even
when they themselves ty to stay calm, the people below them ofen pres­
sure them to go past their mark and into dangerous waters. You have to
have a strategy for dealing with these people. Simply preaching modera­
tion will make you look weak ad small-minded; seeming to fal to follow
up on a victory can lessen your power.
Wen  the Athenian general  and  statesman  Pericles  led  a  series  of
naval campaigns around the Black Sea in 436 B.C., his easy triumphs en­
fla                                                                             ed  the  Athenians'  desire  for  more.  They  drea   ed  of conquering
Egypt, overrunning Persia, sailing for Sicily.  On the  one  had Pericles
reined in these dangerous emotons by wa                                         ng of the perils of hubris. On
the other hand he fed them by fightng small battles that he knew he could
win, creatng the appearance that he was preserving the momentum of suc­
cess. The skill with which Pericles played this game is revealed by what
happened when he died: The demagogues took over, pushed Athens into
invading Sicily, and in one rash move destroyed an empire.
The rhythm of power ofen requires an alteraton of force and cun­
ning.  Too much force  creates  a counterreaction;  too much  cunning,  no
matter how cunning it is, becomes predictable. Working on behalf of his
master, the shogun Oda Nobunaga, the great sixteenth-century Japaese
general (and fture emperor) Hideyoshi once engineered a stunning vic­
tory  over the  amy  of te formidable General  Yoshimoto.  The  shogun
wated to go frter, to tae on and crush yet another powerfl enemy, but
Hideyoshi  reminded him  of the  old Japaese saying:  "When you have
won a victory, tghten the stings of your helmet." For Hideyoshi this wa
the moment for the shogun to switch fom force to cunning and indirec­
ton, settng his enemies against one another through a series of deceptve
alliaces. In this way he would avoid strring up needless oppositon by
appearing overly aggressive. When you ae victorious, then, lie low, and
lull  the  enemy  into  inacton. These  changes  of  rhytm  are  immensely
powerfl.
People who go past the mak are ofen motivated by a desire to please
a master by proving their dedicaton. But an excess of effort exposes you to
the risk of making the master suspicious of you. On several occasions, gen­
erals under Philip of Macedon were disgraced and demoted immediately
afer leading their troops to a great victory; one more such victory, Philip
thought, and the man might become a riyal instead of an underling. When
you serve a master, it is ofen wise to measure your victories careflly, let­
tng him get the glory and never making him uneasy. It is also wise to es­
tablish a patter of strict obedience to ear his tust. In the fourth century
B.C.,  a  captan  under  the  notoriously  severe  Chinese  general  Wu  Ch'i
charged  ahead  before  a battle had  begun  and  came  bac with several
416                                                                             LAW 47

enemy heads. He thought he had shown his fiery enthusiasm, but Wu Ch'i
was unimpressed. "A   talented officer," the genera sad with a sigh as he or­
dered the man beheaded, "but a disobedient one."
Anoter moment when a small success ca spoil the caces for  a
larger one may come if a master or superior grats you a favor: It is a da­
gerous mistae to ask for more. You will seem insecure-perhaps you feel
you did not deserve this favor, and have to grab as muc as you can when
you have the chance, which may not come again. The proper response is
to accept the favor graciously and withdraw. Any subsequent favors you
should eam without having to ask for them.
Finaly, the moment when you stop ha great dramatc import. What
comes last stcks in the mind as a kind of exclamaton point. There is no
better time to stop and walk away than after a victory. Keep going and you
risk lessening the effect, even ending up defeated. As lawyers say of cross­
examination, ''Always stop with a victory."
Image: Icarus Falling
fom the Sky. His father
Daedalus fashions wings
of wax that allow the
two men to fly out of
the labyrinth  and
escape the Minotaur.
Elated by the tri­
umphant escape
and  the feeling of
flight, Icarus soars
higher  and  high-
er, until the sun
melts the wings
and he hurtles
to  his  death.
Authority: Princes and republics should content themselves with victory,
for when they aim at more, they generally lose. The use of insulting lan­
guage toward an enemy arises from the insolence of victory, or from the
false hope of victory, which latter misleads men as often in their actions
as in their words; for when this false hope takes possession of the mind,
it makes men go beyond the mark, and causes them to sacrifice a cer­
tain good for an uncertain better. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527)
LAW 47                                                                          417

REVERSAL
As Machiavelli says, either destoy a ma or leave hir alone entirely. In­
flicting half punishment or mild injury will only create a enemy whose
hitteress will grow with time, ad who will tae revenge . When you heat
an enemy,  then, make your victory complete.  Crush hir into nonexis­
tence. In the moment of victory, you do not restain yourself from crushing
the  enemy  you  have  defeated,  hut  rather  from  needlessly  advancing
against others. Be merciless with your enemy, hut do not create new ene­
mies hy overreaching.
There are some who hecome more cautous than ever afer a victory,
which they see as just giving them more possessions to worry ahout and
protect. Your cauton after victory should never make you hesitate, or lose
momentum, hut rather act as a safeguad against rash acton. On the other
hand, momentum                                                                a        a phenomenon is greatly overrated. You create your
own successes, and if they follow one upon the other, it is your own doing.
Belief in momentum will only make you emotional, less prone to act state­
gically, and more apt to repeat the same methods. Leave momentum for
those who have nothing hetter to rely upon.
418                                                                           LAW 47

LAW
48
ASSU ME F ORM LESSNESS
JUDGMENT
By taking a shape, b having a visible plan, you open
yoursel to attack.  Instead of   taking a form for your
enemy to grasp, keep yoursel adaptable and on the move.
Accept the fact that nothing is certain and no law i
fixed. The best way to protect yoursel is to be as fluid
and formlss as water; never bet on stability o lasting
order Everything changes.
419

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
By the eighth century B.C., the city-states of Greece had grown so large and
In martial arls, il ;s
prosperous that they had run out of land to support their expanding popu­
;mpOrlanl lhal slrall!liY
he IInfathomahle, thaI                                                         lations.  So  they  tumed to  the  sea, establishing colonies  in Asia Minor,
j'Jrm he ('of!cealed, a/l{1                                                    Sicily, the Italian peninsula, even Afica. The city-state of Sparta, however,
Ihat movemenls he
                                                                               was  landlocked  and  surrounded  by  mountains.  Lacking  access  to  the
IInexpecled, so Ihal
preparedncss lglinst                                                           Mediterranean,  the  Spatans never  became  a  seafaring people;  instead
Ihetn he impos.vihle.                                                          they tumed on the cities around them, and, in a series of brutal, violent
Whal cnahles iI !')()(/                                                        conflicts lasting more than a hundred years, managed to conquer an im­
lefleral t wif! wilhoul
mense area that would provide enough land for teir citzens. This soluton
fail is always havilli
to their problem, however, brought a new, more formidable  one:  How
IInfalhomahie wi.\(!om
a/l{1 a modus oper(//uli                                                       could they maintain and police their conquered territories ? The subordi­
that leaves IO tracks.
nate peoples they ruled now outumbered them ten to  one.  Surely this
Only Ihc fonnless
horde would take a horrible revenge on them.
cannol he aflecled.
Salies llide il1 IInfalh­                                                      Sparta's solution was to create a society dedicated to the at of war.
omahililY, so Iheir f,'d­                                                      Spartans would be tougher, stonger, and fiercer tha their neighbors. This
ings CllIlIlO{ he
was the only way they could ensure their stability and survival.
observed; Ihey operale
Wen a Spartan boy reached te age of seven, he was taken from his
in formlessness, so Iheir
lines ('anllol be crossed.                                                     mother and placed in a military club where he was trained to fight and un­
THE  IOOK CF TIIF                                                              derwent the strictest discipline. The boys slept on beds of reeds; they were
HUAINAN MASTERS,
allotted only one outer garment to wear for a entire year. They studied
CHINA,
SFCOND Cr NTlJRY I-U'.                                                         none of the                                                                     a; indeed, the Spartans banned music, and pe   rtted only
slaves to practice the crafts that were necessary to sustain them. The only
skiIls te Spartas taught were those of warfare. Children seen as weaklings
were lef to die in a cavem in the mountains. No system of money or trad­
ing was allowed in Sparta; acquired wealth, they believed, would sow self­
ishness and dissension, weakening their warrlor discipline. The only way a
Spartan could eam a living was throug agriculture, mostly on state-owned
Ti l l-:  I)()( ,                                                              \\ 1 ' 1 1 1 ' 1 1 1,
lands, which slaves, called helots, would work for hir.
C IWI'I'FIJ I : \ H
The Spartans' single-mindedness allowed them to forge the most pow­
" Whal erime have I
commilled Ihal I                                                               erfl infanty in the world. They mached in perfect order and fought with
should be Ihus mllli­                                                          incompaable bravery. Their tight-knit phalanxes could vanquish an army
laled hy my own                                                                ten times their size, as they proved in defeatng the Persians at Thermopy­
master? " pensively
lae. A Spartan column on the march would stike terror in the enemy; it
exc!aimed Jowler, a
seemed to have no weaknesses. Yet although the Spartans proved them­
YOlillg mastiff "/lere '.
a prelty condirion jfJr a                                                      selves mighty warriors, they had no interest in creating an empire. They
dOI ofmy prelenlions!
only wanted to keep what they had already conquered and to defend it
How can 1 show my
against invaders. Decades would pass without a single change in the system
face amol1l my
friends? Oh! kinl of                                                           that had succeeded so weIl i presering Sparta's status quo.
heasls, 01  ralher Iheir                                                       At the same time that the Spartas were evolving their warlike culture,
lyranI, who wOlild dare
another city-state was rising to equal prominence: Athens. Unlike Sparta,
10 treal YOll Ihll " ? "  Hi.\·
Athens had taken to the sea, not so much to create colonies as for purposes
complaints were nol
ul1follnded, j"r Ihat                                                          of tade. The Athenians became great merchants ; their currency, the fa­
very morinli, his                                                              mous "owl coins," spread throughout the Mediterranean. Unlike the rigid
master, despile Ihe
Spartans, the  Athenians responded to  every  problem with consummate
piercinl shrieks ofOl1r
creatvity, adapting to the occasion and creatng new social forms and new
younl friend, haff
420                                                                            LAW 4 8

arts at an incredible pace. Their society was in constant flux. And as their    harharously cut "Hhis
long pendent ears.
power grew, they ca                                                             e to pose a threat to the defense-minded Spartans.
                                                                                                                                                             Jowler expected nuth­
                                                                                I 431 B.C., the war that had been brewing between Atens and Sparta           ing less than to give up
                                                                                for so  long  finaly  erupted. It lasted  tenty-seven years, but afer many   the ghost.
As he advaneed in
twists of fortune, the Spa                                                      n war machine finally emerged victorious. The
years, he perceivcd that
Spartans now commanded an empire, and this tme they could not stay in
he gained more than he
their shell. If they gave up what they had gained, the beaten Athenians
had lost hy his mutila­
would regroup ad rise aganst them, and the long war would have been             tion; for being natu­
fought for naught.                                                              rally inclined to fight
                                                                                with others, he would
Afer the war, Atenian money poured into Sparta. The Spartans had
                                                                                often havc returned
been traned in warfare, not politcs or economics; because they were so          home with this part
unaccustomed to it, wealt and its accompanying ways of life seduced and         disfigured in a hundred
overwhelmed them.  Spatan govemors were sent to rule what had been              places. A quarrelsume
dog always has his cars
Athenian lands; far fom hore, they succumbed to the worst forms of cor­
laceratcd.
ruption. Sparta had defeated Athens, but the fluid Athenia way of life was      The less we leave
slowly  breaing down  its  discipline  and  loosening its  rigid  order.  And   others to lay hold 01
the better. When one
Atens, meanwhile, was adapting to losing its empire, managing to thrive
has hllt one point to
as a cultural ad economic center.
defend, it s!zould he
Confsed  by  a  change  in  its  status  quo,  Spata  grew  weaker  ad          protcetcd 10r Ji,ar of
weaker. Some thirt years afer defeatng Athens, it lost an important batde       aecident. Take fur
example Master Jowler,
with te city-state of Thebes. Almost ovemight, tis  once mighty nation
bcing armed with                                                                who
collapsed, never to recover.
a spiked ('Ollar, and
having ahout as much
Interpretation                                                                  car as a bird, a wolf
would he pllzzled to
In the evolution of species, protective armor has almost always spelled dis­
know where to
aster. Although there are a few exceptions, the shell most ofen becomes a
tackle him.
dead end for te animal encased in it; it slows the creature down, making it
FABLES,
hard for it to forage for food ad making it a target for fast-moving preda­     JEAN DE LA FONTAINE.
1621 - 1 695
tors. Animals that take to the sea or sky, and that move swifdy and unpre­
dictably, ae infinitely more powerfl ad secure.
In facing a serious problem-controlling superior numbers-Sparta
reacted like an anima tat develops a shell to protect itself fom te envi­
ronment. But like a turde, te Spartans sacrificed mobility for safet. They
managed to preserve stability for three hundred years, but at what cost?
They had no culture beyond warfare, no arts to releve the tension, a con­
stant axiety about the status quo. While teir neighbors took to the sea,
leaming to adapt to a world of constant motion, the Spartans entombed
themselves in their own system. Victory would mean new lands to govem,
which they did not wat; defeat would mean the end of their military ma­
chine, which they did not wat, either. Only stasis allowed tem to survive.
But nothing in the world can remain stable forever, and the shell or system
you evolve for your protecton will someday prove your undoing.
In the case of Spata, it was not te armies of Athens tat defeated it,
but te Atenian money. Money flows everywhere it has te opportunit
to go; it cannot be controlled, or made to fit a prescribed patter. It is in­
herendy chaotc. And in the long run, money made Athens the conqueror,
LAW 48                                                                          421

by infiltating t e  Spa                                                          n system and cOIToding its protective armor. In the
battle between the two systems, Athens was fluid and creative enough to
One seductivc ami u/ti­
take new forms, while Sparta could grow only more rigid untl it craced,
matcly always fatal
path has been the                                                                This is the way the world works, whether for animals, cultures, or indi­
development ofprotec­                                                            viduals. In the face of the world's harshness ad danger, organisms of any
tive armor. An orfan-
kind develop protection-a coat of armor, a rigid system, a comfortng rit­
ism can protect itself by
ual. For the short term it may work, but for the long term it speIls disaster.
concealment, by swift­
ness in fiifht, by effcc­                                                        People weighed down by a system ad inflexible ways of doing things can­
tive counterattack, by                                                           not move fast, cannot sense or adapt to cage. They lumber around more
unitinf for altack and
and more slowly until they go the way of the brontosaurus. Lea                   to move
defense with other indi­
fast and adapt or you will be eaten.
viduals ofits species
and also by encasing                                                             The best way to avoid this fate is to assume for                              essness. No predator
itself within bony plates
alive can attack what it cannot see.
and spines                                                                       A lmost
always the experiment
of armor failed. Crea-
tures adopting it tendcd                                                         OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
to become unwieldy.                                                                                                                                            When World War  11 ended and the Japanese, who had invaded  China
They had to move rela­
                                                                                                                                                               in  1937, had  finaly  been  thrown out,  the  Chinese  Natonalists,  lead by
tively slowly. Hence
they were forced to live                                                         Chiang                                                                        K-shek,  decided  the  time  had  come  to annihilate the  Chinese
mainly on vCfetable                                                                                                                                            Communists, their hated rivals, once  ad for all.  They had almost suc­
food; and thus in
ceeded in 1935, forcing the Communists into the Long March, the                  geling
feneral they were at a
reteat that had greatly dirnished their numbers. Although the Commu­
disadvantafe as
compared with foes                                                               nists had recovered somewhat during the war against Japan, it would not
livinf on more rapidly                                                           be difficult to defeat tem now. They contolled only isolated areas in the
"profitable" animaI
countyside,  had unsophistcated weaponry,  lacked any military experi­
food: The repeated fai/­
ence or traning beyond mountain fightng, and contolled no important
ure ofprotective armor
shows that, even at a                                                            parts of China, except areas of Machuria, which they had managed to take
somewhat low evolu­                                                              after the Japanese  reteat.  Chiang decided to  commit his  best  forces in
tionary level, mind
Machuria. He would take over its major cites and fom those bases would
triumphed over mere
spread trough this norter industial region, sweeping the Communists
malter. It is this sort of
triumph wh ich /zas                                                              away. Once Manchuria had fallen the Communists would collapse.
been supremely exem­                                                             In  1945 and  '46 the plan worked perfectly: The Natonalists  easily
plified in Man.
took the major Manchuria cities. Puzzlingly, though, in the face of this
SCIENTiFIC THEORY
critca campaign, the Communist strategy made no sense. When the Na­
AND RELIGION,
E. W. BARNES,                                                                    tionalists began their push, the Communists dispersed to Manchuria's most
1 933
out-of-the-way corers. Their small units harassed the Nationalist                aes,
ambushing them here, reteatng unexpectedly there, but these dispersed
units never linked up, making them hard to attack. They would seize a
town only to give it up a few weeks later. Forming neither rear guards nor
vanguards, they moved like mercury, never staying in one place, elusive
and formless.
The  Nationalists ascribed this  to two things:  cowardice  in the face
of superior forces and inexperience in stategy.  Mao Tse-tung,  the  Com­
munist leader, was more a poet and philosopher than a general, whereas
Chiang had studied warf are in the West and was a folIower of the German
military writer Carl von Clausewitz,                                             aong others.
422                                                                              LAW 48

Yet a patter did eventually emerge in Mao's attacs. Afer the Nation­
alists had taken the cities, leaving the Communists to occupy what was gen­
Tm                                                                              :  I L\H [<: .\ I D
erally considered Manchuria's useless space, the Communists started using
TH I·:  THU:
that large space to surround the cities. If Chiang sent an army from one city
The sage neither seeks
to reinforce another, the Communists would encircle the rescuing army.
to follow the ways of
Chiag's forces were slowly broken into smaller and smaler units, isolated       the ancients nor estab­
fom one another, their lines of supply and communicaton cut. The Na­            lishes any fixed stan­
                                                                                dard for all times but
tonalists still  had  superior firepower, but if they could not move, what
                                                                                examines the things of
good was it?                                                                    his age and then
A kind of terror overcame the Nationaist soldiers. Commanders com­              prepares to deal
fortably remote from the front lines might laugh at Mao, but the soldiers       with them.
There was in Sung a
had fought the Communists in the mountains, and had come to fear their
man. who tilled a field
elusiveness. Now these soldiers sat in teir cities and watced as their fast­
in which there stood
moving enemies, as fluid as water, poured in on them from all sides. There      the trunk vf a tree.
Once a hare. while
seemed to be millions of them.  The Communists also encircled the sol­
running fast, rushed
diers' spirits, bombarding them with propaganda to lower their morale and
against the trunk,
pressure them to desert.                                                        broke its neck, and
The Nationalists began to surrender in their minds. Their encircled             died. Thereupon the
man cast his plough
and isolated cities started collapsing even before being directly attaced;
aside and watched that
one afer another fell in quick succession. In November of 1948, the Na­
tree, hoping that he
tonalists surrendered Machuria to te Communists-a humiliatng blow               would get another hare.
to the technically superior Nationalist army, and one that proved decisive      Yet he never caught
another hare and was
in the war. By the following yea the Communists contolled all of China.
hirself ridiculed by the
people of Sung. Now
Interpretation                                                                  supposing somebody
The two board games that best approximate the stategies of war are chess        wanted to gvvern the
people of the present
and te Asian game of go. In chess the board is smalI. In comparison to go,
age with the policies
the attack comes relatvely quickly, forcing a decisive battle. It rarely pays
ofthe early kings, he
                                                                                                          to withdraw, or to sacrifice YOUf pieces, which must be concentrated at key   would be doing exactly
areas.                                                                          G                         is much less forma. It is played on a large grid, with 361 inter­             the same thing as that
man who watched the
sectons-nearly six times as many positons as in chess. Black and white
tree.
stones (one color for each side) are placed on the boad's interseetions, one
HAN-FEI-TZU,
at a time, wherever you like. Once all YOUf stones (52 for each side) are on    CHINESE PHILOSOPHER.
THIRD CENTURY Re.
the board, the object is to isolate the stones of YOUf opponent by encircling
them.
A game of go-called wei-chi in China-can last up to three hundred
moves. The strategy is more subtle and fluid than chess, developing slowly;
the more complex the patter your stones initialy create on the board, the
harder it is for YOUf opponent to understand your strategy. Fightng to con­
trol a particular area is not worth the touble: You have to think in lager
terms, to be prepared to sacrifice an area in order eventually to dominate
the board. What you are after is not an entenched position but mobility.
With mobility you ca isolate te opponent in small areas ad then encir­
cle them. The am is not to kill off the opponent's pieces directly, as in
chess, but to induce a kind of paalysis and collapse. Chess is linear, posi­
ton oriented, and aggressive; go is nonlinear and fluid. Aggression is indi-
LAW 48                                                                          423

rect until the end o f  the game, when the winner c a  surround the oppo­
nent's stones at an accelerated pace.
General Rommel
surpassed Patton as a                                                              Chinese military strategists have been influenced by go for centuries.
creative intellect                                                                 Its proverbs have been applied to war tme ad again; Mao Tse-tung was
Rommel shunned mili­                                                               an addict of wei-chi, and its precepts were ingraned i his strategies. A key
tary formalism. He
wei-chi concept, for example, is to use the size of the board to your advan­
made no fixed plans
tage, spreading out i every direction so that your opponent cannot fathom
beyond those intended
for the initial dash;                                                              your movements in a simple linear way.
thereafter, he tailored
"Every Chinese," Mao once wrote, "should consciously trow himself
his tactics to meet
into this war of a jigsaw patter" against the Nationalists. Place your men in
specific situations as
a jigsaw patter in go, and your opponent loses himself tying to figure out
they arose. He was a
lightning-fast decision­                                                           what you are up to. Either he wastes tme pursuing you or, like Chiang           K­
maker, physically
shek, he assumes you are incompetent and falls to protect himself. And i
maintaining a pace that
he concentates on single areas, as Wester stategy advises, he becomes a
matched his active
mentality. In a forbid­                                                            sitting duck for encirclement. In the wei-chi way of war, you encircle the
ding sea ofsand, he                                                                enemy's brain, using mind ga                                                    es,  propaganda,  and irritaton tactcs to
operated in a free envi­
confse and disheaten. This was the stategy of the Communists-a ap­
ronment. Once
parent formlessness that disoriented and terrified their enemy.
Rommel ruptured the
British lines in Africa,                                                           Where chess is linear ad direct, the acient game of go is closer to the
he had the whole                                                                   kind of strategy that will prove relevant in a world where battles are fought
northern part of the
indirectly, in vast, loosely connected aeas. Its stategies are abstact and
continent opened
multidimensional, inhabitng a plane beyond time  ad space: the state­
to him.
Comparatively free                                                                 gst's mind. In this fluid form of warfare, you value movement over posi­
from the hamstringing                                                              tion. Your speed and mobility make it impossible to predict your moves;
authority of Berlin,
unable to understand you, your enemy can form no strategy to defeat you.
disregarding orders
Instead of fixing on particular spots, this indirect form of warfare spreads
even from Hit/er
himself on occasion,                                                               out, just as you can use the large and disconnected nature of the rea world
Rommel implemented                                                                 to your advantage. Be like a vapor. Do not give your opponents aything
one successful opera­
solid to attack; watch as they exhaust themselves pursuing you, tying to
tion after another until
cope with your elusiveness. Only formlessness allows you to tuly surprise
he had most of North
Africa IInder his                                                                  your enemies-by the time they figure out where you are and what you are
control and Cairo                                                                  up to, it is too late.
rrembling ar his feet.
THE ART OF WINNING
Wen you want to fight us, we don 't let you and you can 't find uso But when
WARS,
JAMES MRAZEK,                                                                      we want to fight you, we make sure that you can 't get away and we hit you
1 968
squarely , . . and wipe you out. , , . The enemy advances, we retreat; the enemy
camps, we harass; the enemy tires, we attack; the enemy retreats, we pursue.
Mao Tse-tung, 1893-1 976
KEYS TO POWER
The  human  aimal  is  distnguished  by  its  constant  creaton  of forms.
Rarely expressing its emotons  directly, it gives them form throug lan­
guage, or through socially acceptable rituas. We    cannot communicate our
emotons without a form.
The forms that we create, however, change constantly-in fashion, i
424                                                                                LAW 4 8

style, in al those human phenomena representng the mood of the mo­
ment. We    are constantly altering the forms we have inherited from previ­
CII\H.\(''!'I'.11                                                                \ 1l \J O H
ous generations, and these changes are signs of life and vitality. Indeed, the
To   carry o u t  the
things that don 't change,  the forms that rigidif,  come  to look to us like
instinctual inhibition
death, and we destroy them. The young show this most clearly: Uncom­
demanded by the
                                                                                 fortable with the forms that society imposes upon them, having no set iden­   modern world and tu
tity, they play with their own characters,                                       tng on a variety of masks and                                                 be able to cope with the
energy stasis which
poses to express themselves. This is the vitality that drives the motor of
results from this inhibi­
form, creating constant changes in style.
tion. the ego has to
The powerfl are often people who in their youth have shown im­                   undergo a change. The
ego. i.e.•  that part of
mense creatvity in expressing someting new through a new form. Society
the person that is
grants them power because it hungers for and rewads this sort of newness.
exposed to danger,
The problem comes later, when they ofen grow conservative and posses­            becomes rigid, as we
sive. They no longer dream of creatng new forms; their identites are set,        say, when it is continu­
their habits congeal, and teir rigidity makes them easy targets. Everyone        ally subjected to the
                                                                                 same or similar
knows their next move. Instead of demading respect they elicit boredom:
                                                                                 conflicts between need
Get off the stage! we say, let someone else, someone younger, entertain uso      and a fear-inducing
When locked in the past, the powerfl look comical-they are overripe              outer world. It acquires
in this process a
fruit, waiting to fall fom the tee.
chronic, automaticallv
Power can only thrive if it is flexible in its forms. To   be formless is not
funetioning mode of
to be amorphous; everything has a form-it is impossible to avoid. The            reaction, i.e., its "char­
formlessness of power is more like that of water, or mercury, taking the         aeter. " It is as if the
affective personality
form of whatever is around it. Changing constantly, it is never predictable.
armored itself as if the
The powerfl are constatly creatng form, and their power comes fom
hard shell it develops
the rapidity with which they ca chage. Their formlessness is in the eye of       were intended to defleet
the enemy who cannot see what they ae up to and so has nothing solid to          and weaken the blows
of the outer world as
attack. This is the premier pose of power: ungraspable, as elusive and swif
weil as the clamoring
as the god Mercury, who could take any form he pleased and used this
of the inner needs. This
ability to wreak havoc on Mount Olympus.                                         armoring makes the
Human creations evolve toward abstraction, toward being more men­                person less sensitive to
unp1easure, but also
tal and less material. This evolution is clear in                                a, which, i this century,
restricts his libidinal
made the great discovery of abstaction and conceptualism; it can also be
and aggressive motility
seen in politcs, which over time have become less overtly violent, more          and thus reduees his
complicated, indirect and cerebral. Wafare and strategy too have followed        capa city for achieve­
ment ami pleasure. We
this patter. Stategy began in the maipulaton of armies on land, posi­
say the ego has become
tioning them in ordered formatons; on land, stategy is relatively two di­
lessflexible and more
mensional, and controlled by topography.  But all the great powers have          rigid, and that the abil­
eventually taken to the sea, for commerce and colonization. And to protect       ity to regulate the
energy economy
their trading lanes tey have had to leam how to fight at sea. Maritime war­
depends on the extent
fare requires tremendous creatvity and abstract thinking, since the lines
ofthe armoring.
are constantly shifng. Naval captans distnguish themselves by their abil­        WII.HFLM REICH,
ity to adapt to the literal fluidity of the terran and to confse the enemy       1 897- 1 957
with an abstract, hard-to-antcipate form. They are operating in a third di­
mension: the mind.
Back on lad, guerrilla warfare too demonstates this evolution toward
abstaction. T. E .  Lawrence was perhaps the first modem stategist to de-
LAW 4 8                                                                          425

velop the theory behind this kind o f warfae, and to put i t into practce. His
ideas  influenced  Mao,  who  found in  his writngs  an     uncany Wester
equivalent to wei-chi. Lawrence was working with Arabs fightng for their
territory aganst the Turks. His idea was to mae the Arabs blend into te
vast desert, never providing a target, never collectng together in one place.
As the Turks scra                                                                 bled to fight this vaporous army,  they spread them­
selves thin, wastng energy in moving fom place to place. They had the su­
perior  firepower  but  the  Arabs  kept  the  initative  by playing  cat  and
mouse, giving te Turks nothing to  hold on to, destoying their morale.
"Most was were wars of contact                                                    Ours should be a war of detachment,"
Lawrence wrote. "We were to contain the enemy by te silent threat of a
vast unknown desert, not disdosing ourselves tll we attacked."
This is the ultmate form of stategy. The war of engagement has be­
come far too dangerous and costly; indirecton ad elusiveness yield fa
better results at a much lower cost. The main cost, in fact, is mental-the
thinking it taes to aign your forces in scattered patters, and to under­
mine the minds and psychology of your opponents. And nothing will inf­
riate and disorient them more tha formlessness. In a world where wars of
detachment ae the order of te day, formlessness is crucial.
The first psychological requirement of formlessness is to train yourself
to take nothing personally. Never show any defensiveness. When you act
defensive, you show your emotons, reveaing a dea form. Your oppo­
nents will realize they have hit a nerve, an Achilles' heel. And tey will hit
it again and again. So tan yourself to take nothing personally. Never let
anyone get your back up. Be like a slippery ball that cannot be held: Let no
one know what gets to you, or where your weaknesses lie. Make your face
a formless mask  and you  will infriate and disorient your sceming col­
leagues and opponents.
One man who used tis technique was Baron James Rothschild. A
Germa Jew in Paris, in a culture decidedly unfiendly to foreigners, Roth­
schild never took ay attack on hir personally or showed he had been
hurt in any way. He frthermore adapted hirself to the politcal dimate,
whatever it was-the stffly formal Restoration monachy of Louis XVIII,
the bourgeois reign of Louis-Philippe, the democratic revolution of 1848,
the  upstart  Louis-Napoleon  crowned  emperor  in  1852. Rothschild  ac­
cepted them one ad a, ad blended in. He could afford to appear hypo­
critcal  or  opportunistc  because he  was  vaued for  his  money,  not his
politcs;  his  money was  te  currency  of power.  While  he  adapted  and
thrived, outwardly never showing a form, all the other great f                    ailies that
had  begun the  century immensely wealthy  were  ruined in the period's
complicated shifs and turs of fortune. Attaching themselves to the past,
they reveaed their embrace of a form.
Throughout history, the formless style of ruling has been most adeptly
practced by the queen who reigns alone. A queen is in a radicaly different
position fom a king; because she is a woma, her subjects and courtiers
are likely to doubt her abilit to rule, her stength of character. If she favors
426                                                                               LAW 48

one side in some ideological struggle, she is said to be actng out of emo­
tional attachment. Yet if she represses her emotons ad plays te authori­
taria,  in  the  male  fashion,  she  arouses worse  critcism  stll.  Either  by
nature or by experience, then, queens tend to adopt a flexible style of gov­
ering that in the end ofen proves more powerfl than the more direct,
male form.
Two female leaders exemplifing the formless style of rule ae Queen
Elizabeth of England and Empress Catherine the Great of                            Rssia. In the vi­
olent wars between Catholics ad Potestants, Elizabeth steered a middIe
course. She avoided alliances that would commit her to one side, and that
over tme would harm the count                                                      . She managed to keep her county at
peace untl it was stong enough for war. Her reign was one of the most glo­
rious in history because of her incredible capacity to adapt and her flexible
ideology.
Caterine the Great too evolved an improvisatory stle of govering.
M                                                                                  ter she deposed her husband, Emperor Peter II, taing sole control of
Russia in 1762, no one thought she would survive. But she had no precon­
ceived ideas, no philosophy or theory to dictate her policies. Altough a
foreigner (she came from Germany), she understood Russia's moods, and
how it was changing over the yeas. "One must gover in such a way that
one's people think they themselves wat to do what one commads them
to do," she said, and to do tis she had to be always a step ahead of their
desires and to adapt to their resistance. By never forcing the issue, she re­
formed Russia in a stikingly short period of time.
This feminine, formless stle of ruling may have emerged as a way of
prospering under difficult circumstances, but it has proved immensely se­
ductve to those who have served under it. Being fluid, it is relatvely easy
for its subjects to obey, for they feel less coerced, less bent to their ruler's
ideology. It aso opens up optons where a adherence to a doctine closes
them off. Without committng to one side, it allows the ruler to play one
enemy off anoter. Rigid rulers may seem stong, but with tme teir in­
flexibility wears on the nerves, ad their subjects find ways to push them
fom the stage. Flexible, formless rulers will be muc critcized, but they
will endure, and people will eventually come to identf with them, since
they are as their subjects are-changing with the wind,  open to circum­
stance.
Despite upsets and delays, the per                                                 eable style of power generaly tri­
umphs  in  the  end,  just  as  Athens  eventualy  won  victory  over  Sparta
through its money and its culture. When you find yourself in conflict with
someone stronger and more rigid, allow them a momenta                              victory. Seem
to bow to teir superiority. Then, by being formless and adaptable, slowly
insinuate yourself into their soul. This way you will catch them off guard,
for rigid people are always ready to ward off direct blows but are helpless
against the subtle and insinuatng. To    succeed at such a stategy you must
play the chameleon-conform on the surface, while breaking down your
enemy fom the inside.
LAW 48                                                                             427

For centuries t e Japanese would accept foreigners graciously, and ap­
peared susceptible to foreign cultures and influences. Joao  Rodriguez, a
Portuguese priest who arrived in Japan in 1577 and lived there far many
years, wrote, "I am flabbergasted by the Japanese willingness to try and ac­
cept everything Portuguese." He saw Japaese in the streets wearing Por­
tuguese clothing, with rosary beads at their necks and crosses at their hips.
This might seem like a weak, mutable culture, but Japan's adaptability
actually protected the  county fom having an alien culture imposed by
military invasion. It seduced the Portuguese and other Westemers into be­
lieving the Japanese were yielding to a superior culture when actually the
foreign culture's ways were merely a fashion to  be donned and doffed.
Under the surface, Japaese culture thrived. Had te Japanese been rigid
about foreign influences and tried to fight them off, they might have suf­
fered the injuries that the West inflicted on China. That is the power of
formlessness                                                                        it gives the aggressor nothing to react aganst, noting to hit.
In evoluton, lageness is ofen the first step toward extinction. What is
immense and bloated has no mobility, but must constantly feed itself. The
unintelligent are often seduced into believing that size connotes power, the
bigger the beter.
In 483 B.C., King Xerxes of Persia invaded Greece, believing he could
conquer te country in one easy campaign.                                            Aer all, he had the largest
army ever assembled for one invasion-the historian Herodotus estimated
it at over more tha five million. The Persians planned to build a bridge
across the Hellespont to overrun Greece fom the lad, while their equally
immense  navy  would  pin  the  Greek  ships  in  habor,  preventing  their
forces from escaping to sea. The plan seemed sure, yet as Xerxes prepaed
the invasion, his adviser Artabanus wa                                              ed his master of grave misgivings:
"The two mightiest powers in the world are against you," he said. Xerxes
laughed-what powers could match his gigantic army? "I will tell you what
they are," answered Artabanus. "The land and the sea." There were no safe
harbors large enough to receive Xerxes' fleet. And the more land the Per­
sias conquered, and the longer their supply lines stetched, the more ru­
inous the cost of feeding this immense army would prove.
Thinking his adviser a cowad, Xerxes proceeded with the invasion.
Yet as Artabanus predicted, bad weather at sea decimated the Persian fleet,
which was too large to take shelter in any harbor. On land, meanwhile, te
Persian army destroyed everything in its path, which only made it impossi­
ble to feed, since the destructon included crops and stores of food. It was
also a easy and slow-moving target. The Greeks practced all kinds of de­
ceptve maneuvers to disorient the Persians. Xerxes' eventua defeat at the
hads of the Greek allies was an immense disaster. The story is emblematic
of all those who sacrifice mobility for size: The flexible and fleet of foot will
almost always win, for tey have more strategie optons. The more gigantc
the enemy, the easier it is to induce collapse.
The need for formlessness becomes greater the older we get, as we
grow more likely to become set in our ways and assume too rigid a form.
428                                                                                 LAW 48

We     become  predictable,  always  the  first sign of decrepitude.  And pre­
dictability makes us appear comica1. Although ridicule and disdain might
seem mild forms of attack, they are actually potent weapons, and will even­
tually erode a foundaton of power. An enemy who does not respect you
will grow bold, and boldness makes even the smallest animal dangerous.
The late-eighteenth-century court of France, as exemplified by Marie­
Antoinette, had  become  so hopelessly  tied to  a rigid formality that the
average Frenchman thought it a silly relic. This depreciation of a centuries­
old institution was the first sign of a terminal disease, for it represented a
symbolic loosening of the people's tes to monarcy. As the situation wors­
ened, Marie-Antoinette ad King Louis XVI grew only more rigid in their
adherence to the past-and quickened teir path to the guillotine. King
Charles I of England reacted similarly to  the tide of democratic cange
brewing in England in the 1630s: He disbaded Paliament, and his court
rituals grew increasingly formal and distant.  He wanted to retur to  an
older style  of ruling,  with adherence to  al kinds of petty protoco1.  His
rigidity only heightened the desire for  change.  Soon,  of course, he was
swept up in a devastating civil war, and eventually he lost his head to the
executioner's axe.
As you get older, you must rely even less on the past. Be vigilant lest
the form your character has taken makes you seem a relic. It is not a matter
of mimicking the  fashions  of youth-that is  equally  worthy of laughter.
Rather your mind must constantly adapt to eac circumstance, even the in­
evitable  change  that the  time  has  come  to  move  over  and let  those  of
younger age prepare  for  their  ascendancy.  Rigidity will only make you
look uncannily like a cadaver.
Never forget, though, that formlessness is a stategie pose. It gives you
room to create tactical surprises; as your enemies stuggle to guess your
next move, they reveal their own strategy, putting them at a decided disad­
vantage. It keeps the initiative on your side, putting your enemies in the
position of never acting, constantly reactng. It foils their spying and intelli­
gence. Remember: Formlessness is a too1. Never confse it with a go-with­
the-flow style, or with a religious resignation to the twists of fortune. You
use formlessness, not because it creates inner harmony and peace, but be­
cause it will increase your power.
Finally,  learing  to  adapt  to  each  new  circumstance  means  seeing
events through your own eyes, and ofen ignoring the advice that people
constantly peddle your way. It means that ultimately you must throw out
the laws that others preach, ad the books they write to tell you what to do,
and the sage advice of the eIder. "The laws that gover circumstaces are
abolished by new circumstances," Napoleon wrote, which means tat it is
up to you to gauge each new situaton. Rely too much on other people's
ideas and you end up taking a form not of your own maing. Too much re­
spect for other people's wisdom will make you depreciate your own. Be
brutal  with  the  past,  especially your own,  and  have  no  respect for the
philosophies that are foisted on you fom outside.
LAW 4 8                                                                            429

Image :  Mercury.  The winged messenger,
god of commerce, patron saint of thieves,
gambIers, and all those who deceive through
swiftness. The day Mercury was born he invented
the lyre; by that evening he had stolen the cattle of
Apollo. He would scour the world, assuming
whatever form he desired. Like the liquid metal
named after him, he embodies the elusive,
the ungraspable-the p ower of formlessness.
Authority: Therefore the consummation of forming an army is to arrive
at formlessness. Victory in war  is  not repetitious, but  adapts  its form
endlessly                                                                     A military force has no constant formation, water has no
constant shape: The ability to gain victory by changing and adapting ac­
cording to the opponent is called genius. (Sun-tzu, fourth century B.C.)
REVERSAL
Using space to disperse and create an abstact patter should not mean for­
saking the concentration of your power when it is vauable to you. Form­
lessness makes your enemies hunt a over for you, scattering their own
forces, mental as weIl as physical. When you finally engage them, though,
hit them with a powerfl, concentrated blow. That is how Mao succeeded
against te Natonasts:  He broke teir forces into small, isolated units,
which he then could easily overwhelm wit a strong attac. The law of con­
centraton prevailed.
When you play with formlessness, keep on top of the process, and
keep your long-term stategy in mind. When you assume a form and go on
the attack, use concentation, speed, and power. As Mao said, " fen we
fight you, we make sure you ca't get away."
430                                                                           LAW 48

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aesop. Fabls 0/Aesop. Translated by S. A. Hanford. New York: Penguin
Books, 1954.
Bloodworth, Dennis and Ching Ping.  The Chinese Maehiaveli. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1976.
Bowyer, J. Barton.  Cheatin: Deeeption in Ur and Magie, Games and Sport,
Sex and Religion, Business and Con Games, Plitics and Epionage, Art and
Scienee. New York: St. M                                                      an's Pess, 1982.
Castiglione, Baldesar.  The Book 0/ the Courtier. Translated by George BuH.
New York: Penguin Books, 1976.
Clausewitz, Carl von.  On Ur. Edited and tanslated by Michael Howard
ad Peter Paret. Pineeton: Pineeton Universit Pess, 1976.
Elias, Norbert. The Court Societ. Translated by Edmund Jepheott. Oxford:
Basil BlaekweH Publishers, 1983.
de Franeeseo,  Grete.  The Pwer 0/ the Charltan. Translated  by Miri          a
Beard. New Haven: Yae University Pess, 1939.
Haey, Jay.                                                                    T                  Power Tctic 0/Jesus Chrit and Other Esays. New York:
W W Norton, 1989.
Han-fei-tzu.  The Complete Jrks 0/Han-i-tu. Translated by W K. Liao.
2 volumes. London: Arthur Pobsthain, 1959.
Herodotus.  The Histories. Translated by Aubrey de Selineourt. New York:
Penguin Books, 1987
Isaaeson, Walter. Kissinger: A Biography. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992.
La Fontaine, Jean  deo  Selected Fabls. Translated by James Michie. New
York: Penguin Books, 1982.
Lenclos, Ninon deo Li, Letters andEpicurean Philosophy 0/Ninon de Lenclos,
The Celebrated Beaut 0/the 17th Centur. Chieago: Lion Publishing Co.,
1903.
Ludwig,  Emil.  Bismarek: Te Stor 0/ a Fighter. Translated by Eden and
Cedar Paul. Boston: Little, Brown, 1928.
Maehiavelli,  Nieeolö.  The Pinee and The Dieourses. Translated by Luigi
Rieci and Christian E. Detmold. New York: Modem Library, 1940.
Mao Tse-tung.  Selcted Miltary Writin 0/Mao Te-tung. Beijing:  Foreign
Languages Pess, 1963.
Millan, Betty. Monstrous Regiment: Jmen Rulers in Men  Jrl. Windsor
Forest, Berks, U.K.: Kensal Press, 1983.
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                  431

Montagne, Michel deo                                                          T              Gomplete Essays. Translated by M .  A. Screech .
New York: Penguin Books, 1987
Mrazek, Col. Ja                                                               es.            T                                                          Art o/Wnnin Urs. New York: Waker and Com­
pay, 1968.
Nash, Jay Robert.  Hustlers and Gon Men. New York:  M. Evans ad Co.,
1976.
Nietzsehe, Friedrich. The Birth o/Tragedy and Te Genealog 0/ Morals. Trans­
lated by Francis  Golffing.  Garden  Cit:  Doubleday Anchor Books,
1956.
Orieux, Jean.  Tlerand: The Art 0/ Survival. Translated by Patricia Wolf.
New York: Knopf, 1974.
Plutarch. Makers 0/ Rome. Translated by lan Scott-Kilvert. New York: Pen­
guin Books, 1965.
---. The Rise and Fal 0/ Athens. Translated by lan Scott-Kilvert. New York:
Penguin Books, 1960.
Rebhor, Wayne A. Foxes and Lions: Machiavelli's Gondence Men. lthaca:
Corell University Pess, 1988.
de Retz, Cardina. Memoirs 0/Jean Franfoi Paul de Gondi, Gardinal de Retz.
2 vols. London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1917
Sadler,  A.  L.   Gha-no-yu: The Japanese Ta Geremony. Rutland,  Vermont:
Charles E .  Tuttle Company, 1962.
Scharfstein, Ben-Ami. AmoralPolitics. Albany: State University of New York
Pess, 1995.
Sceibe, Karl E. Mirrors, Masks, Lies and Secrets. New York: Paeger Publish­
ers, 1979.
Schopenhauer, Arthur.  The Wisdom oLi and Gounsel and Maxims. Trans­
lated by T Bailey Saunders. Amherst, New York: Pometheus Books,
1995.
Senger, Harro von.                                                            T              Book 0/ Stratagems: Tctics Jr Triumph and Survival.
Edited and translated by Myron B. Gubitz. New York: Penguin Books,
1991.
Siu, R. G. H. The Graf o/Power. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1979.
Sun-tzu.                                                                      T              Art o/Ur. Translated by Thomas Cleay. Boston: Shambhala,
1988.
Thucydides. The History 0/ the Peloponnesian Ur. Translated by Rex Warer.
New York: Penguin Books, 1972.
Weil, "Yellow Kid."                                                           T              Gon Game and 'Telow Kid" "il: The Autobiogaphy
0/ the Famous Gon Artist as tol to W T Brannon. New York: Dover Publi­
catons, 1974.
Zagorin,  Perez.  Uys 0/ Lying: Disimultion, Persecution and Gonrmit in
Earl Moder Europe. Cambridge : Harvad University Pess, 1990.
432                                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX
!tale page rerenees indieate   Alexader III "the Great, "                                         spectacles and, 309
sidebars.                      King, 47 182-83,                                      Arabs, 426
                               331-32, 355, 356,                                                  Aretno, Pietro, 46, 48,
Abraham, 73-74                 371-72                                                             175, 232, 288-89,
absence, 364                   fater and, 350-52                                     307
using to increase respect      Alexander VI, Pope, 150,                                           patonage strategy of,
and honor, 1 15-22                                           151, 176-77, 202, 308                338-40
abstraction, 425-26            Alexandra, Czarina, 364                               argument:
Academie Fran aise,            Alfonso I, King, 187                                               emotons and, 322
306                            Algardi, Alessandro, 357                                           winning through actons
accomplishments:               Ali, Muhammad, 129                                                 vs., 69-75, 378
as effortless, 245-53          Always say Iess ta nec-                                            Aristdes, 359
and following a famous         essary (Law 4),                                                    aristocratc pose, 282-90
predecessor, 347-57            31-36                                                              Aristode, 182-83
achievements of others,        Amasis, 72-73                                                      ArIen, Michael, 32
using, 60                      American Insttute of                                               Armenian Fol-tals andFa-
acting, 196, 198, 199                                        Electrical Engineers,                                           bls, Retol b Charles
action(s):                     58                                                                 Downin 257
entering with boldness,        America Museum, 45-46                                              armor, protectve, 421,
227-35                         AmscheI, Mayer, 173                                                422, 425
security and, 355              Ancient Chinese Parabls (Yu                                        Aold, Philip, 157-59,
waiting and, 296               Hsiu Sen, ed.), 117                                                160-61
winning through argu-          anger, xi, xx, 332                                                 arrogance, 287
ment vs., 69-75, 378           repression of, 329                                                 arrogant and proud man,
Adam's Curse (Yeats), 250      and st                        g up waters to                       dealing with, 138
adaptabilit, 419               catch fish, 325-32                                                 arrow, image of, 176
admiration, 405                tantrums, 327, 329, 331                                            Arsinoe, 207
Aeschylus, 405                 animal magnetsm,                                                   Artabanus, 428
Aesop, 96, 140, 233, 237,      223-24                                                             a dealers, 142-43
335, 361, 370                  "Animals Stricken with the                                         Duveen, see Duveen,
Afican folktale, 10            Plague, The" (La                                                   Joseph
Aglauros, 403-4                Fontaine), 38-40                                                   Picasso and, 127-28,
Aguirre, Lope de, 138-40       Anjou, Duke of, 146-47                                149
Aiken, John, 172-73            Anne, (ueen, 337                                                   Vollard, 260
Albert, Prince, 55             Anne of Cleves, 394                                                artsts, Renaissance, 251
Albizzi family, 403-4          Antony, Marc, 207,                                                 Art of Cross-Eamination,
Albrecht, King, 361            310- 1 1                                                           T                          (Wellman), 412
alchemy, 264-66, 270           appearance(s), xx, xxi, 44,                           Art ofWar,   T                          (Sun-tzu),
Alcibiades, 148, 360,          143, 147, 204, 251,                                                105, 111
381-82                         364                                                                Art ofWr, Te (Zhang
Alen on, Duke of, 146,         cat's-paw and, 209                                                 Yu), 67
277                            jokes about, 181, 185                                              Art ofWnning Wars, The
Alexander I, Czar, 63          of penecton, 400-409                                               (Mrazek), 424
                                                                                                                                                    INDEX   433

asking for too little, 234                   Avoid stepping into a                      Bertrand, Louis, 33
"Ass and the Gardener,                       great man's shoes                          Best Fahls o[ La Fontaine,
The" (Indian fable),                         (Law 41), 347-57                           T, see La Fontaine,
302                                          Azebu Gallas, 328                          Jean de, fables of
associatons:                                 Aztecs, 203, 365             Bible, 1 12
in mirrored situatons,                                                                  Genesis, 406
390-91                                       Bacon, Francis, 407                        Kings, 23-24
with unhappy and un-                         bad news, bearing of, 180                  Matthew, 169
lucky people,                                bait, 62-68                                Second Book of
76-81                                        resistng, 296-97                           Samuel, 212
Assume for                   lessness (Law   Balaun, Guillaume de,                      BiUy Budd (Melville), 408
48), 419-30                                  116-17                                     Birch, Jonatha, 328
Assyrians, 1 18, 412                         Balboa, Vaco Nlnez de,                     Bismarck, Otto von,
Astyages, King, 4 1 1                        59, 237-39                                 19-20, 60, 64, 85,
Atahualpa, King, 359, 360,                   Balcha, Dejazmach, 26-27                   239-41, 242-43,
365                                          Balzac, Honore de, xx                      279-80, 323
Atheim Conquered (Cam-                       banishment, 358, 361, 363                  Austrian negotator and,
panella), 320-21,                            in Athens, 359, 360, 361                   159-60
322                                          Bardas, 9, 13                              goal of, 240-41, 242-43
Atens, 97-98, 148,                           bargain demons, 334-35                     rise to power of, 83-84,
164-65, 167, 203,                            Bruac, Pierre de, 1 16       85
318, 354, 359-61,                            Barlow, Samuel L., 157                     role-playing of, 198
407, 416, 420-22             Ba              es, E. W., 422                             speeches of, 19-20, 21,
baishment in, 359,           Ba              um, P. T., 30, 42,           279
360, 361                                     45-47, 253, 270, 346                       Virchow and, 255
Sicily invaded by,  172,                     Barry, Madame du,                          Bisticci, Vespasiano da,
241-42, 305, 381,                            348-39                       404
416                                          Basilius, Emperor, 9-10                    Blacks, te, and the
war between Sparta                           Batchelor, Charles, 57                     Whites, 153, 361-62
ad, 421-22, 427                              Bathsheba, and David, 212                  black sheep, image of,
attacks, 419                                 Bavaia, Duke of, 265, 270    324
deflecting of, 306                           Bay of Pigs, 305             blame:
fast, 68                                     beau geste, 198                            scapegoat and, 201-5,
taking personally, 426                       BeauvalIon, Jean-Baptste     214
attention:                                   Rosemond de, 77              taking, 214
courting of, 44-55, 191,                     behaving like others,                      blending in, 29, 317
194, 229                                     while tinking as                           Blenheim, 337-38
paid to an enemy, 300                        you like, 317-24                           BIome, Count, 160
unconventonal ideas                          Behind the Senes o[ Royal                  Bloodworth, Dennis,
ad, 317                                      Palces in Korea (Ha                        294-95
audacity (boldness),                         Tae-Hung) , 230-32           Blue Boy,     T                            (Gainsbor-
227-35, 288, 429                             Bekbulatovich, Simeon,                     ough), 278-79
development of,                              384-85                                     Bogart, Humphrey, 87
233-34                                       Belgium, 240                               boldness, 227-35, 288,
hesitaton compared                           belief, people's need for,   429
with, 228-29                                 215-26                                     development of,
Augusta, Queen, 279-80                       Belloc, Hilaire, 301                       233-34
Augustus, Emperor, 353                       Bengal, 352                                hesitaton compared
Aurelian, Emperor,                           Benjamin, Walter, 240                      with, 228-29
393-94                                       Berenice, 206                              Boleyn, Anne, 303, 304,
Austia, 159-60, 239-41                       Bergma, Ingmar, 408          393
Ausubel, Nata,  153-54,      Ber             i, Pieto, 357                              Bonaparte, Louis, 242
201, 223-24                                  Be royal in your own fash-                 Boniface VIII (Cardina
authority, fea and, 228                      ion: act like a king to                    Gaetani), 361-62
autonomy, 152, 153, 154                      be teated like one                         Book o[ Five Rins, A
Avery, Ephram K., 45                         (Law 34), 282-90                           (Musashi) , 78, 379
434                          INDEX

Book 0/Goverment or Rules      Fontaine), 116                                           Cha-no-yu: TeJapanese Ta
Jr Kings, Te (a-               Camillus, 93                                             Ceremony (Sadler),
Mulk), 338-40                  Campanella, Tommaso,                                     246-47, 313, 326-27
Book 0/the Courtier, The       319-21, 322, 323              Chao, 186
(Castglione), 250-51           Capone, A, 90, 91                                        Chapman, Walker,  138-40
Book 0/ the Huainan Masters,   Caravan o/Dream (Shah),       character, 191, 195
The, 420                       1 19, 238-39, 305             charlatanism, 216-19
Borgia, Cesare, 5, 68, 151,    Careme, Marie-Antoine,                                   Charles I, King, 290, 429
152, 176-77, 202,              341                                                      Charles V, Emperor, 47,
308, 415-16                    Carmagnola, Count of, 83,                                121, 152, 175, 340
de Orco and, 202-3,            84                                                       Charles I, King, 214, 277
204                            Carpi, Ugo da, 46             Charles X, King, 283
negotatons of, 298             Carranza, Venustano, 301,     Charleval, 257
at Sinigaglia,  108-10         302                           Chäteaurou, Duchesse
Borgias, Te (Cloulas),         Carroll, Lewis, 379           de, 413
108- 10                        Casanova, Giovani, 42,                                   "Chelm Justice" (Yiddish
Borri, Francesco               175, 192, 233, 334            folktale), 201
Giuseppe, 90,                  Cassius, 80, 193              Cheng, 141-42
219-20                         Castiglione, Baldassare, 9,   Ch'en Po-ta, 204
Borromini, Francesco, 357      43, 47                        chess, 126, 352-53, 423,
Bourbon, Antoine de, 277       on nonchalance,               424
Bourbon, Henri de, 277         250-51, 252                   World Cha                  pionship
"Boy and the Nettle, The"      Castlereagh, Viscount, 64     of, 124-26
(Aesop), 233                   Castacani, Castruccio,        Chesterfield, Philip
boyars, 230-31, 255-56,        96-97, 153                                               Dormer Stanhope,
384, 385, 407                  Castro, Fidel, 305                                       Lord, xviii, 144
Bragadino, 11, 264-66,         cat, image of, 398            Chesterton, G. K., 301
267, 270                       Catherine de' Medicis,        Chiag Kai-shek, 1 12,
Bramante, Donato, 407,         (ueen, 214, 277-78                                       208-9, 422-23, 424
409                            Catherine of Aragon,          Ch'ien Shu, King, 1 1
Brecht, Bertolt, 165-67,       303-4, 393                    Chih, Earl, 94
168, 197-98, 322-23            Catherine te Great, Em-       childhood weaknesses,
Brummell, George               press, 427                    272-73
"Beau," 185                    Catholicism, 319-21, 328,     Chin, 153
Brunelleschi, Filippo,         361, 393-94                   Ch'in, Emperor, 395
66-67, 404                     cat's-paw, 206-14                                        China, 10, 1 1, 14, 91, 92,
Brutus, 80, 193                image of, 213                 1ll, 186
buried treasure, 334-35        mistakes in using, 214                                   Chiang Kai-shek in,
Burton, Richard, 198           two uses of, 209                                         1 12, 208-9, 422-23,
Butler, Benjamin, 157          "Cat That Waked By            424
Byron, George Gordon,          Himself, The"                                            Chin/Hsing struggle in,
Lord, 185                      (Kipling), 84                 153
                               Cavaignac, Louis Eugene,                                 Ch'in Shih Huang Ti in,
Caesar, Julius, 80, 323,       242                           131-32
                               Cecil, Robert, 364                                       Chuko Liang in, 38-39,
Cleopata and, 193,             center of power, stking                                  211-12,370-7l,
198, 206-7, 353                at, 358-66                                               372-73, 395, 396
death of, 193                  change, 425                                              Ch'ung-erh in, 141-42
at Pharsalia, 278-79           fantasy of transforma-                                   Communists vs. Naton-
public image of, 192-93        ton vs., 267                                             alists in, 1 12, 208-9,
Rubicon crossing of,           reform and, 392-99                                       422-23, 424, 430
192, 198                       Cha-no-yu (Japanese tea                                  Emperor Sung in, 10-12
Caligula, 324                  ceremony), 5, 209,                                       Empress Wu  in, 1 10- 1 1,
Callisthenes, 182-83           210, 246, 306, 313,           1 13
"Camel and the Floating        326, 343, 344,                                           Han Dynasty in, 10,
Sticks, The" (La               388                           183, 201
INDEX                          4.5

China (cont.)                                                                   Claudius I, Emperor, 160                                    scapegoat, 201-5,
                         Hsiang YulLiu Pang                                     Clausewitz, Carl von, 1 12,    214
                         stuggle in, 108-10           174, 237, 422                                                                         of ticks and techniques,
                         Japan's invasion of, 14,     clean hands, 200-214                                                                  245, 247, 251-52
                         1 12, 208-9, 422             Cleary, Thoma, 25, 138                                   Conceal your intentions
                         King Goujian in, 168         Cleistenes, 285-87                                                                    (Law 3), 16-30
                         Kissinger and, 61, 149       Clement VII, Pope, 303,                                  Concentate your forces
                         Mao Tse-tung in, see         304, 393                                                                              (Law 23), 171-77
                         Mao Tse-tung                 Cleopata,  193, 198,                                     Concini, Concino, 274,
                         Mongol invasion of, 99                                 206-8, 209, 353                275
Nixon's visit to, 6 1                                 Antony and, 207,                                         Conde, Louis, Pince of,
                         Ts'ao Ts'ao in, 201-2,       310- 11                                                  277
                         203, 330, 372-73             Cloulas, Ivan, 108- 10                                   Condivi, Ascanio, 406-8
21 Hitories in, 183                                   Cohn, Harry, 86-87                                                                    condottieri (mercenary sol-
                         Wang Mang in, 397                                      Colbert, Jean-Baptiste, 2,                                  diers) , 83, 108- 10
                         War  of the Three King-      5                                                        conflict, fantasy of union
doms in, 38                                                                     Coligny, Gaspard de, 214       vs., 268
                         Wei kingdom in, 41           Cologe (Turer), 188                                      conformity, outward dis-
                         WulMiddle Kingdom            color, 314                                                                            play of, 3 17-24, 398
war in, 172                                                                     Columbia Pictures, 86, 87      Confucius, 131, 353, 395,
                         Chinese Lookin Gl, The       Columbus, Christopher,                                   396, 397
                         (Bloodworth), 294-95                                   234, 237, 284-86               Congress of Vienna, 63,
Chinese parables, 117,                                Columbus Stategy, 288                                                                 94, 104, 184-85
337-38                                                common touch, 317, 323                                   Conquest 0/ Peru, The
                         Chinese sayings, 152, 160,   commit                    ent, to others,                                             (Pescott), 359-60
361                                                   145-55                                                   conservatism, 394, 398,
                         Ch'in Shih Huang Ti, Em-     Communists, 176, 323                                     425
                         peror, 131-32                                          Chinese, 1 12, 208-9,          Constantne, Emperor,
                         choice, contolling optons                              422-23, 424; see also          314, 393
in, 254-62                                                                      Mao Tse-tung                   contempt, 305, 307, 308
Choiseul, Etienne de,                                                           House Un-American              contasts, between overt
348-49                                                                          Actvites Committee                                          traits and weak-
Chopin, Frederic, 194                                                           and, 86-87, 165-67,            nesses, 273
                         Chosroes 11, King, 104-5                               197-98, 322-23                 Control the options: get
Chou Yung, 296                                                                  compelling spectacles, cre-                                 others to play with
Christanity, 393                                                                ation of, 309-16                                            the cards you deal
Christna, Queen, 220                                                            con artsts, 52, 90, 91, 260,                                (Law 31), 254-62
Christ                   as, 393-94                                             268, 323, 334                  controversy, 48
Chuko Liang, 38-39,                                                             aristocratc front used                                      cord that binds, image of,
                         211-12, 370-71,              by, 288                                                  100
372-73                                                Aold and Slack,                                          Corella, Michelotto,
                         Mao Tse-tung and, 395,                                 157-59, 160-61                 109- 10
396                                                   boldness in, 228                                         Corf (Corcyra), 97-98
Ch'ung-erh, 141-42                                                              Bragadino, 264-66,             Corinth, 97-98
                         Churchill, Winston, 106      267, 270                                                                              Coriolanus, GnaEus Mar-
                         paintng of, 188-89           Crowningsfield, 92                                       cius, 32-33
                         Church of England, 304       fee lunch and, 346                                       Cortes, Herando, 365
Ch'u-Ts'ai, Yelu, 99                                                            Furey's ring of, 140-41                                     Counter-Reformaton, 319
Cicero, 134                                           Hartzell, 268                                            court, courters, courtng,
Cimon, 407                                                                      isolaton used by, 364                                       xvii-xviii, 146-49,
                         "Citzen and te Traveller,                              Lustig, see Lustg, Victor                                   178-90, 2 1 1 ,  398
                         The" (Stevenson),            Stavisky, 260                                            cat's-paw ad, 212
322                                                                             Weil, see Weil, Joseph                                      nonchalance in, 250-51
Civil War, 127                                        "Yellow Kid"                                             symbols and, 315
                         Sherma's march in,           concealment:                                             Court Artist, The (W         ake),
260-61                                                                          of mistaes, by use of          46-47
436                      INDEX

Court attention at all cost                         Dävila, Pedro Arias (Pe-                di Prima, Diane, 337-38
(Law 6), 44-55                                      drarias), 238, 239                      Disarm and infriate with
Courter's Mirror, 378, 388                          deadlines, setting for oth-             te mirror effect
Craf ofPower, Te (Siu),                             ers, 297-98                             (Law 44), 376-91
2 07-8, 247-48, 295           death:                                                        Dicourses (Machiavelli),
Create compelling specta-                           absence and, 120                        472- 73
eIes (Law 37),                                      fantasy of reversal of,                 Discover each man's
309-16                        268-69                                                        tumbscrew (Lw
creativity, 425                                     Deceiver's Mirror, 379,                 33), 271-81
credit, for work done by      388-89                                                        Disdain things you cannot
others, 56-61                                       decepton, xx-xxi, 23,                   have: ignoring them
critcism, of those above                            27-28, 36                               is the best revenge
you, 181                                            contolling the optons                   (Law 36), 300-308
Croesus, 41 1                                       ad, 254-62                              dishonesty:
Cromwell, Oliver, 290                               courtiership and, 190                   reputaton for, 30, 42
Cromwell, Thoma,                                    cultlike following and,                 and selective honesty,
393-94, 398                   216                                                           89
cross and the sun, image                            distracton and, 91, 92                  dispersion of forces,
of, 316                       gifs and, 92                                                  176-77
cross-examination, 472                              imagery and, 3 1 1                      displaying your talents,
"Crow and the Sheep,                                intelligence and, 161                   and outshining mas-
The" (Aesop), 740                                   isolation in, 364                       ter, 1-7
"Crow-Hen, the Cobra,                               kindness and, 93                        Disraeli, Benjamin, 74
and the Jackal, The"                                mirror effect in, 376-91                distance, in fantasy, 269
(Panchatantra tale),                                reputation for, 30, 42                  distacton, in deception,
207-8                                               smoke screens in, 23,                   91, 92
crown, image of, 289                                27, 28, 29, 30, 36,                     "Ditch High Priest"
Crowningsfield, John, 92      129                                                           (Kenko), 329
Croy, Duc de, 414                                   verbal argument and, 74                 Dodsley, Robert, 85, 296
Crush your enemy totally                            decoyed objects of desire,              "Dog with the Cropped
(Law 15), 107-14              17, 21, 28                                                    Eas, The" (La
Cuba, 305                     defects, shared, 81                                           Fontane), 420-27
cultlike following, creaton   defensiveness, 426                                            Do not build fortresses to
of, 2 15-26                                         de F1eury, AndnS-Hercule,               protect yourself-iso-
culture(s) :                  348                                                           laton is dangerous
different, 267-68, 319                              de Gaulle, Charles, 315                 (Law 18), 130-36
vacuums in, 353-54                                  Deioces, 1 18-19, 120                   Do not commit to anyone
cyeIone, image of, 128                              Denmark, 239, 240                       (Law 20), 145-55
cynicism, 181                                       de Orco, Remirro, 202-3,                Do not go past the mark
Cyprus, 264, 318              204                                                           you aimed for: in
Cyrus the Great, 368-69,      dependence:                                                   victory, lea when
411-12                        mutual, 88                                                    to stop (Law 47),
                                                    of others, 82-88                        410-18
Dazen, Kuriyama, 209- 1 1     Dermi Pobe,           T                             (Shah),   Doria, Andrea, 708
Daon, 359-60                  336-37                                                        Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 355
dance of the veils, image     desire, 305                                                   Downing, Charles, 256-57
of, 54                                              Despise the free lunch                  Drake swindle, 268
danger, in isolation,                               (Law 40), 333-46                        draa, 197, 199
130-36                                              diaond mine, 157-59                     Drew, Daniel, 66
Dante Alighieri, 361-62                             Diana (roman goddess),                  du Barry, Madame,
Darien, 237, 238                                    312, 313, 314, 315                      348-49
Darley, Lord, 147                                   Diane de Poitiers, 9, 278,              Duchamp, Marcei, 35, 53
Darwin, Charles, 398                                311-13, 315                             Dudevant, Aurore Dupin
David, and Bathsheba, 272                           Diderot, Denis, 195, 196                (George Sand),
David and Goliath Strat-      dignity, 288, 331                                             194-95, 196, 306
eg, 288                       Dinocrates, 47                                                Dudley, Robert, 146
                                                                                                                         INDEX   437

Dujarier, Alexandre, 77                 tme and, 295, 296, 297          Essex, Earl of, 34, 146, 364
Dutch Lowlands, 146                     uncontrollable, 273             Este, Francesco d', 186
Duveen, Joseph, 102-3,                  Enciso, Francisco Femän-        Este, Isabella d', 150-52
120, 298                                dez de, 237                     Ethiopia, 25, 288, 327-28
Dürer paintng and,                      end, the, planning all the      Ethiopian proverb, 167
161-62                                  way to, 236-44                  exotica, 267-68, 319
Ford and, 142-43                        end tme, 296, 298-99
Huntngton and, 278-79        enemies:                                   Fabius, 53
Mellon and, 28, 102                     attention paid to, 300          Fabls (Aesop), 96, 740,
Natonal Gallery ofA                     crushing completely,            233, 237, 335, 367,
and, 28                                 107-14                          370
                                        culdike following and,          Fables (Birch), 328
"Eagle and the Sow, The"     216                                        Fabls (Dodsley), 85, 296
(Tolstoy), 752                          former friends, 109             Fabls (La Fontaine), seeLa
economic scarcity, 120-21               fortesses as protection                                        Fontaine, Jean de, fa-
Edison, Thomas, 42-43,                  fom, 130-36                     bles of
48, 57, 58                              isolating of, 358,              Fabls (Stevenson), 322
Edison MedaI, 58                        363-64, 366                     Fabls (Tolstoy), 83, 752,
effort:                                 mirror effect and,              304, 477
excess of, in pleasing                  376-91                          fables and folktales:
master, 416-17                          overreaction to moves           "The Animals Stricken
saving of, 209, 2 1 1                   of, 167                         with the Plague,"
effortlessness, appearance              reconciliation with, 109,       38-40
of, 245-53                   111                                        "The Ass and the Gar-
Egypt, 206-7                            reputations of, 37, 40,         dener," 302
Eiffel Tower, 94, 229-30     42                                         "The Boy and te Net-
Eisenhower, Dwight D.,                  revenge of, 1 1 1, 1 14,        de," 233
315, 353                                261, 366                        "The Cat That Walked
Elba, 63-64, 184, 294, 379              self-destructon of, 1 14        By Himself," 84
EI Dorado, 237, 238,                    size of, 428                    "Chelm Justice," 207
335-37                                  stirring up anger in,           "The Chestnut and the
Elizabeth I, Queen, 34,                 325-32                          Fig Tree," 764
146-47, 148, 149,                       sympathizing with, 109          "The Citzen and the
213, 364, 406, 427                      using, 8-15                     Traveller," 322
"Elm-Tree and the Vine,                 winning over, 371 -72           "The Crow and the
The" (Dodsley), 85                      energy, saving of, 209, 2 1 1   Sheep," 740
emotions, xix-xx                        England, 146, 147, 239,         "The Crow-Hen, the
appealing to, 367-75         240                                        Cobra, and the
arguments and, 322                      Washington and, 154             Jackal," 207-8
control of, 152, 153,                   Ennemoser, j., 227, 222         "The Dog with the
155, 182, 196, 243,                     Enter action with boldness      Cropped Ears,"
330                                     (Law 28), 227-35                420-27
defensiveness and, 426                  entances and exits, 198         "The Eagle and the
forms and, 424                          envy, 188, 400, 402-3,          Sow," 752
hiding of, 321                          404, 405-6, 407-9               "The Elm Tree and the
infectiousness of, 76                   Epicurus, 319                   Vine," 85
money and, 342-43,                      equality, xviii                 "A Fool and a Wise
                                        Erickson, Milton H.,            Man," 209-70
planning and, 243                       212-13, 259, 315,               "The Fox and the
playing on, 93               363                                        Grapes," 307
repression of, 329                      mirroring used by,              "The Fox and the
spectacle and, 316                      386-87                          Stork," 380-87
and strring up waters to     Erie       Rroad, 91 -92                   "Te FuneraI of the L-
catch fish, 325-32                      Escorial, EI, 353               oness," 264-65
as thumbscrews, 271,                    Esays inIlness (Kenko),         "The Gende                     A                        of Per-
273, 281                                302-3, 329, 474                 suaion," 370
438                          INDEX

"The Goose and the                                "The Virtues of the              fluidity, 419-30
Horse,"  172-73                                   Cock,"  117                      following, creaton of,
                       "The Greedy Man and        "The Wasp and the                215-26
                       the Envious Man,"          Prince," 45                      "Fool and a Wise Man, P'
401                                               "When the Waters Were            (La Fontaine),
"The India Bird,"                                 Changed," 319-20                 209- 10
210- 11                                           "The Wolves and the              forced tme, 296, 297-98
                       "The King, the Sufi, and   Sheep," 361                      forces:
the Surgeon,"                                     Fahlesfom Boccaccio an           concentratng of, 171-77
238-39                                            Chaucer (Aikin),                 dispersion of, 176-77
                       "The Kites, te Crows,      172-73                           Ford, Gerald, 149
                       and the Fox," 150-51       Fahls (Kriloff), 179-80,         Ford, Henry, 142-43
"The Liar," 256-57                                272-73, 306                      foreign cultures, imitaton
"The Lion, the                                    facial expression, 28            of, 319
                       Chamois, and the           Fadiman, Clifon, 32, 165,        Foreman, George, 129
Fox," 272-73                                      255, 258, 301                    forgiveness, 214
"The Man and His                                  Faenza, 5                        Forman, Simon, 146
Shadow," 306                                      Faliscans, 93                    formlessness, 419-30
                       "The Man Who Loved         fall of the favorite, 205        Formosa, 267-68
                       Money Better Than          false sincerity, 17, 21-22, 30   forms, 424-25
Life," 337-38                                     familiarity, 123                 fortress, image of, 136
                       "The Merchant and His      fantasies, playing to,           fortresses, 130-36
                       Friend," 377-79            263-70                           fortunate people, associa-
"The Miser," 335                                  Fan Tseng, 108-9                 ton with, 76, 81
                       "The Monkey and the        fates, intertwining of, 86       Fouche, Joseph, 13,
Cat," 206-7                                       fater, image of, 355             292-95, 326, 327
                       "The Monkey and the        father figures :                 Napoleon's spying on,
Peas," 304                                        hostility toward, 352            379-80
                       "The Monkey and the        stepping into shoes of,          Fouquet, Nicolas, 2, 3, 5
Wasp," 328                                        347-57                           "Fox and the Grapes,
"The Owl Who Was                                  favors, 346                      The" (L Fontaine),
God," 217-19                                      asking for, 181, 187, 417        301
                       "The Nut and the Cam-      grantng of, 210, 2 1 1           "Fox and the Stork, The"
panile," 77                                       fear, 296                        (La Fontaine),
"The Peasant and the                              boldness and, 228                380-81
                       Apple Tree," 96            other people's, vs. their        France, 146, 147, 150, 151,
                       "The Power of a Lie,"      love, 87                         239, 240, 241
223-24                                            Ferdinand, King, 303             Fronde in, 133, 315
"The Price of Envy,"                              Ferrara, 150, 151                1848 electons in, 242
153-54                                            fights, being drawn into,        July Revoluton in, 154
"The Snake, the                                   150-54                           Revoluton in, 292, 349,
                       Farmer, and te             Fischer, Bobby, 124-26           369, 380, 399
Heron,"  10                                       "Flame-Colored Cloak,            Rothschild and, 174,
                       "The Tortoise, the Ele-    The" (Herodotus),                262, 283, 340-41
                       phant, and the Hip-        341-43                           Washington and, 154
popota                 us," 57-58                 flattery, 180                    Francesco, Grete de, 90,
"The Trout and the                                Flaubert, Gustave, 195           220-22, 225
                       Gudgeon," 296              Flemish Lowlands, 146            Francis I, King, 3 1 1, 340
"The Two Adventur-                                flexibility, 244, 297, 425,      Francis 11, King, 277
ers," 228-29                                      427                              Franklin, Benjamin, 220
"The Two Dogs,"                                   flock of fatted sheep,           Frazer, James George,
179-80                                            image of, 365                    203
                       "The Two Frogs," 237       Florence, 150, 152, 341,         Frederick 11 "the Great,"
                       "The Two Horses," 83       342, 361, 398, 403-4             King, 374
"The Vainglorious                                 Blacks and Whites in,            Frederick William IV,
Cockerel," 411                                    361-62                           King, 19-20, 84, 85
INDEX                  439

              feedom, 82, 167, 258, 262                      Ghiberti, Lorenzo, 67                                                         on being first, 348
              of exression, 321                              gifs, 92, 334, 340, 343,                                                      on being kinglike, 289
              fee lunch, 333-46                              344                                                                           on being seen, 49
              Freud, Sigund, 272, 298,                       to patrons, 288-89                                                            on comrttng to oth­
              353, 383                                       Gilbert, Marie (Lola Mon­                                                     ers, 151, 155
              Frick, Henry, 103                                                             tez), 55, 77-79, 235,                          on concealing abilites,
fiend(s):                                                    390-91                                                               249
              former, now enemies,                           Giovane, Pa                    a, 46                                          on concealing mistkes,
109                                                          Giovio, Paolo, 109                                                   205
              posing as, while work­                         giving before you take, 91,                                                   on contempt, 308
              ing as spy, 101-6                              92, 288, 334                                                                  on disagreement wit
              scapegoatng of, 205                            Gl Menagerie,                  T                                              the many, 318
              tustng of, 8-15               \                (Williams), 355                                                               on doing tings yourself
              friendliness, with master,                     go (wei-cl), 363, 423-24,                                                     vs. using tird par­
181                                                          426                                                                           tes, 213
              friendship, dependence                         goal:                                                                         on envy, 408, 409, 409
              vs., 87                                        concentation on, 175                                                          on fear of failure, 230
              Fronde, the, 133, 315                          disguising of, 212                                                            on finding the thumb-
              "Funera of te Lioness,                                                        stopping afer reaching,                        screw, 281
              The" (La Fontaine),                            410-18                                                                        on intensity and exten­
              264-65                                         "God and Abraham" (Te                                                         sity, 176
              Furey, Joe, 140-41                             Suhtl Ruse:                    T                         Book                 on lettng things be, 305
              Fushimiya, 343-44                                                             o[ Arahic Wisdom and                           on misfortunes of oth­
              fture, 241, 295, 296                           Guiie), 73-74                                                                 ers, 81
                                                             gods, Greek, 241, 243                                                         on mystery, 54
gadfly, 324                                                  gods on Mount Olypus,                                                         on others' dependence,
              Gaetani, Cadinal (Boni­                        image of, 243                                                        88
              face VIII), 361-62                             Godunov, Boris, 407                                                           on outshining the mas-
              Gainsborough, Thomas,                          Goethe, Johann Wolfgang                                                       ter, 7
              278-79                                                                        von, xix, 173, 222,                            on role-playing, 198
              Galileo, 3-4, 175, 319, 398                    374                                                                           on self-respect, 283
gaps, 228                                                    Golen Bough, Te (Frazer),                                                     on stepping into a great
              Gabo, Greta, 121                               203                                                                           man's shoes, 356
              garden of weeds, image of,                     Goln Dream,                    T                         : Seekers            on using enemies, 15
408                                                                                         o[ Ei Dorado (Chap­                            on using oters' knowl­
              Geezil, Sam, 23-25, 27                         man), 138-40                                                                  edge, 60
              generosity, 333, 334, 344                      Goldwyn, Samuel, 32                                                           on using stupidity, 161
              in disa                       ing victim,      Gonzaga, Gianfancesco,                                                        Graham, James, 220-22
              89-94                                          150, 151                                                                      grandeur, 338
              indiscriminate, 335                            goodwill gestures, 373                                                        Grant, Ulysses S., 366
              of others, appealing to,                       "Goose and te Horse,                                                          grattude of oters, appeal-
                                                                                            The" (fable), 172-73                           ing to, 95-100
              strategie, 341, 342                            Gordian knot, 351                                                             great men, stepping into
              Genghis Khan, 99                               Gordon-Gordon, John,                                                          shoes of, 347-57
"Gentle       A                             of Persuasion,                                  Lord Qohn Crown-                               Greece, 241, 318, 319, 350,
              The" (Aesop), 370                              ingsfield), 92                                                                351, 381, 420, 428
              Germany, 239, 240, 241                         Go-Saiin, Emperor, 306-7                                                      greed, 334, 337, 346
              attacks on London, 106                         Gossaert, Jan, 47                                                             "Greedy Man and the En­
              Treat ofVersailles and,                        Goujian, King, 168                                                            vious Ma, The"
1 14                                                         Gould, Jay, 28-29, 91-92                                                      Qewish parable),
              gestures, as indication of                     governg, flexibility in,                                             401
              weaknesses, 272                                427                                                                           Greek sea-god Poteus,
              Get others to do the work                      Graciän, Baltasar, xxii, 19,                                                  image of, 198
              for you, but always                            72, 314, 378                                                                  Greeley, Horace, 157
              take the credit (Law                           on absence and pres­                                                          Gross, George, 24-25
              7), 56-61                                      ence, 121                                                            Gugsa,   R,                            328-29
40            INDEX

Guicciardini, Francesco,                                     Hiero, King, 13                                        Humphrey, Hubert, 149
321                                                          "Hippocleides at Sicyon"                               Hundred Days, the, 197
guilt, exteriorizing of,                                                                    (Herodotus), 285-87     Hungary, 297
203-4                                                        Hispanic Monarchy,             T                       hunter, image of, 144
Guise family, 214                                                                           (Campanella), 320       Huntngton, Arabella,
                                                Histories,   T                              (Herodotus),            278-79
half a heat, going halfay                                    72-73, 285-87,                                         Huntington, Collis P., 278
with, 228                                                    341-43, 368-69                                         hurrying, 291, 296,
Halliwell, Kenneth, 401-2,                                   Hitler, Adolf, 165, 166                                297-98
408                                                          Holbein, Hans, 394                                     Hyperbolus, 360
hallucinatory effect, 379                                    Holland, 99
Harlet (Shakespeare), 54,                                    Holywood (Kanin), 273- 74                              Icas falling from te sky,
353                                                          Hollywood, House Un-                                   image of, 417
Han Dynaty, 10, 183, 201                                                                    Aerican Actvites        ideas, unconventional,
Han-fei-tzu, 36, 58, 94,                                     Committee and,                                         3 17-24
128,                           131, 344, 375,                86-87, 165-67,                                         identty, new, 191-99
396, 423                                                     197-98, 322-23                                         Ieyau, Tokugawa, Em-
Han Kao-tsu (Liu Pang),                                      honesty, xviii, 20-21, 22,                             peror, 99, 246, 266,
108-10                                          183                                                                 296
Hannibal, 53-54                                              selectve, in disarming                                 ignoring things you cannot
Hanno the elephant, 232                                      victim, 89-94                                          have, 300-308
happy people, associaton                                     honeyed bear tap, image                                illusions, 251
wit, 76, 80                                                  of, 67                                                 images, 309, 313, 314-16,
"Hare and the Tree, The"                                     honor, using absence to                                374
(Han-fei-tzu), 423                                           increae, 1 15-22                                       in creating cult, 217-18
Harpending, Asbury,                                          Hoover, Herbert, 197                                   symbols ad, 314-15
157-58, 159                                                  Hoover, J. Edgar, 87                                   impatence, 296
Hartzell, Oscar, 268                                         hopelessly insecure man,                               Inalchik, 139
Ha Tae-hung, 230-32                                          dealing with, 138                                      Incas, 59, 238, 239, 335,
hawk, image of, 299                                          ho  s of te bull, image                                359-60, 365
Heald, George Trafford, 78                                   of, 261                                                incense-smelling compet-
hearts and minds of oth-                                     Houdini, Hary, 197,                                    ton, 344-45
ers, working on,                                             247-50, 252, 298,                                      income, disguising source
367-75                                          330                                                                 of, 218
Hechigwa, Sakamotoya,                                        House ofMedici, The: It Rise                           independence, 82, 85, 88,
313                                                                                         and Fall (Hibbert),     145, 154, 155, 175
Hechigwan, Yamashina,                           382                                                                 reputaton for, 148
387-88                                                       House Un-A                     erican Ac-              Indiana (Sand), 194
Heihachiro, Togo, 65                                                                        tvites Committee,       "Indian Bird, The" (Shah),
Helen of Troy, 92-93                                         86-87, 165-67,                                         210- 11
help, asking for, 95-100                                     197-98, 322-23                                         Indian fables:
Henri 11, King, 9, 277, 278,                                 Howe, Louis, 204                                       "The Ass and the Gar-
311-12                                                       "How to Broadcat News"                                 dener," 302
Henry VIII, King, 303-4,                                                                    (The Subtt Ruse: The    "The Kites, the Crows,
393-94                                                                                      Book of Arahic Wisdor   and te Fox," 150-51
Hercules, 352                                                and Guit), 208-9                                       "The Merchant and His
Herodotus, 72-73, 238,                                       Hsiang Yu, 108-10                                      Friend," 377-79
285-87, 341-43,                                              Hsien, Duke, 94                                        "The Wap and the
368-69, 428                                     Hsing, 153                                                          Pince," 45
hesitation, boldness com-                       Huan, 153                                                           Infection: avoid te un-
pared with, 228-29                                           Hugo, Victor, 374                                      happy and unlucky
Heth, Joice, 46                                              Huguenots, 214, 275                                    (Law 10), 76-81
Hibbert, Christopher, 382                                    Huh Saeng, 230-32                                      inferiority, feelings of,
Hideyoshi, Emperor, 5,                                       Huizinga, Johan, 311-12                                405
210, 246, 296, 313,                                          Hull, Pat, 78                                          information:
416                                                          Hume, David, 266                                       false, giving of, 106
INDEX                          4                1

               informaton (cont.                               foreign cultures and,                               Kennedy, John F, 305,
               gathering of, 101, 106,                         168, 428                                            353
143                                                            Holland and, 99                                     Ketel, Comelis, 46
               isolaton and, 130                               incense-smelling com-                               keyhole, image of, 374
               infriatng enemies with                                                       petiton in, 344-45     Khaldf, ibn, 334-35
               the mirror effect,                              Portugal and, 99                                    Khan, Genghis, 139-40
               376-91                                          Russia and, 65-66                                   Khrushchev, Nikita, 73
               innocence, xi                                   lapanese Art ofWar,          T                      Kierkegaard, Seren, 30,
               Innocent, Pope, 382                             (Cleary), 25                                        401, 403, 406
               innocent goat, image of,                        Japanese tea ceremony                               kindness, selective, 91, 93
205                                                                                         (Cha-no-yu), 5, 209,   kinds of people, 137-44
               innovation, 392, 398, 399                                                    210, 246, 306, 313,    king, 363, 426
               Inquisition, 219, 220,                                                       326, 343, 344, 388     acting like, 282-90
               319-20, 322                                     Javiac, Guillelma de,                               hostlity toward, 352
               insecurity, 55, 138, 141, 143                   116-17                                              "King, the Sufi, and the
               arrogance and, 287                              jaws of ingrattude, image                           Surgeon, The"
               as thumbscrew, 271                              of, 15                                              (Shah), 238-39
               instncts, 143                                   Jehu, King, 23-24                                   Kipling, Rudyard, 84
               insultng others, 142, 143,                      Jesus Christ, 169, 220,                             Kissiner (Isaacson), 33
               159, 189                                                                     323, 387, 393, 394     Kissinger, Henry:
               intelligence:                                   Jewish parable, 401                                 boldness of, 234
               downplaying of, 156-62                          Jews, 322, 393                                      China and, 61, 149
               showing of, 161                                 Joäo 11, King, 285                                  Humphrey and, 149
               intentions, concealment                         Johnson, Andrew, 366                                indispensability of, 87
               of, 16-30                                       Johnson, Lyndon B., 324                             in Israeli negotiations,
               cat's-paw and, 209, 212                         Johnson, Samuel, 133                                73
               intmacy, with master, 181                       loke, Te (Kundera), 168                             kidnapping attempt
               Isaacson, Walter, 33                            jokes, about appearances                            and, 13
               Isabella, Queen, 286, 303                                                    or tates, 181, 185,    Lord's report and,
               Isabey, Jean-Baptste,                           186, 189                                            32-33
               184-85                                          Jones, Emest, 352-53                                Nixon and, 61, 87,
Iskandar,      K                               Ka'us ibn, 79   Joseph, and coat of many                            148-49, 259, 306
               isolation, 136, 364-65                          colors, 406                                         options contolled by,
               danger of, 130-36                               Joseph 11, King, 356-57                             259
               of enemies, 358,                                Julius 11, Pope, 86, 151,                           Pentagon Papers and,
               363--4, 366                                                                  175, 406, 407, 409     306
Israelis, 73                                                   lulius Caesar (Shake-                               reputaton of, 41-42
               Italy, 150, 151, 152, 320                       speare), 79, 299                                    smoke screen and, 28
               condottieri in, 83, 108- 10                     July Revoluton, 154                                 Soviet Union and, 149
               Inquisition in, 219, 220,                       Jupiter, moons of, 3-4                              "Kites, the Crows, and the
               319-20                                          justce, appeals to, 96-97                           Fox, The" (Indian
               Romagna, 202-3                                  lust So Stories (Kipling),                          fable), 150-51
               Ivan IV "the Terrible,"                         84                                                  Kleppini, 248-50, 330
               Czar, 230, 231, 233,                                                                                knowledge:
               235, 384-86, 407                                K, Garson, 273-74                                   fom the past, using,
               withdrawal of, 255-56,                          Kao Tsung, 110                                      59-60
               258, 261                                        Kautilya, xi, 103, 108,                             specialized, having ap-
                                                               110, 211                                            pearance of, 86
               Jackson, Stonewall, 127                         Kean, Charles John, 55                              Know who you're deaing
               Jacobins, 292, 293, 380                         Keep others in suspended                            with-do not offend
Ja             , Mulla, 1 19                                                                terror: cultivate an   the wrong person
               Janin, 'Louis, 158                                                           a of unpredictabil-    (Law 19), 137-44
Janus, xx                                                                                   ity (Law 17), 123-29   Koller, General, 64
Japan:                                                         Keep your hands clean                               Kriloff, Ivan, 179-80,
               China invaded by, 14,                                                        (Law 26), 200-214      272-73, 306
               112, 208-9, 422                                 Kenko, 302-3, 32, 414                               Kundera, Milan, 168
42             INDEX

Kurbski, Andrey, 255        Law 8: Make other people      Law 24: Play the perfect
                            come to you-use               courter, 178-90
La Bruyere, Jean de, 100,   bait if necessary,            Law 25: Re-create your-
126, 182                    62-68                         self, 191-99
Lacan, Jacques, 298         Lw 9: Win through your        Lw 26: Keep YOUT hads
La Fontaine, Jean de, fa-   actons, never                 clean, 200-214
bles of:                    trough argument,              Law 27: Play on people's
"The Animas Stricken        69-75                         need to believe t
with the Plague,"           Law 10: Infection: avoid      create a cultlike fol-
38-40                       te unhappy and un-            IOwing, 215-26
"The Camel and the          lucky, 76-81                  Law 28: Enter action with
Floating Stcks,"  176       Law 1 1 :  Leam to keep       boldness, 227-35
"The Dog with the           people dependent on           Lw 29: Plan a the way
Cropped Ears,"              you, 82-88                    to te end, 236-44
420-21                      Law 12: Use selectve hon-     Law 30: Make your ac-
"A Fool and a Wise          esty and generosity           complishments seem
Man," 209-10                to disarm your vic-           effortless, 245-53
"The Fox and the            tim, 89-94                    Law 31: Contol the op-
Grapes," 301                Law 13: When asking for       tions: get oters to
"The Fox and the            help, appeal to peo-          play with the cards
Stork,". 380-81             ple's self-interest,          you deal, 254-62
"The Funeral of the L-      never to teir mercy           Law 32: Play to people's
oness," 264-65              or gratitude, 95- 100         fantasies, 263-70
"The Monkey and te          Law 14: Pose as a friend,     Law 33: Discover each
Cat," 206-7                 work as a spy, 101-6          man's thumbscrew,
"The Two Adventur-          Law 15: Crush YOU             271-81
ers," 228-29                enemy totally,                Law 34: Be royal in your
laguage, changing to fit    107-14                        own fashion: act like
different people, 180       Lw 16: Use absence to in-     a king to be teated
La Rochefoucauld,           crease respect and            like one, 282-90
Francois de, 18, 257,       honor, 1 15-22                Law 35: Master the a of
402                         Law 17: Keep others in        tming, 291-99
on absence, 117             suspended terror:             Law 36: Disdain tings
spying tp fom, 104          cultvate an a of un-          you cannot have: ig-
Lauzun, Duc de, 48          predictability,               noring them is te
Law 1: Never outshine the   123-29                        best revenge,
master, 1-7                 Law 18: Do not build          300-308
Law 2: Never put too        fortresses to protect         Law 37: Create com-
much tust in friends,       yourself-isolaton i           pelling spectacles,
leam how to use en-         dangerous, 130-36             309-16
emies, 8-15                 Law 19: Know who you're       Law 38: Think as you like
Law 3: Conceal your in-     dealing with-do not           but behave like oth-
tentons, 16-30              offend the wrong              ers, 317-24
Law 4: Always say less      person, 137-44                Law 39: Str up waters to
than necessary,             Law 20: Do not commit t       catch fish, 325-32
31-36                       ayone, 145-55                 Law 40: Despise te free
Law 5: So much depends      Law 2 1 :  Play a sucker to   lunch, 333-46
on reputation-guard         catch a sucker-seem           Law 4 1 :  Avoid stepping
it with your life,          dumber tan your               into a great man's
37-43                       mark, 156-62                  shoes, 347-57
Law 6: Court attention at   Law 22: Use the surrender     Law 42: Strike the shep-
all cost, 44-55             tactic: transform             herd and the sheep
Law 7: Get others to do     weakness into                 will scatter, 358-66
the work for you, but       power, 163-70                 Law 43: Work on the
always take te              Law 23: Concentate your       hearts and minds of
credit, 56-61               forces, 171-77                oters, 367-75
INDEX                       43

                        Law 44: Disarm and inf-      Li of Pericl, The                                                      as Sun King, 313, 314,
                        riate with the mirror                                    (Plutarch), 349-50                         315, 348, 349, 384
                        effect, 376-91                                           Li ofSertorius (Plutarch),                 tacitumity of, 33-34, 33
                        Law 45: Preach the need      292-94                                                                 Louis XV, King, 348-50,
                        for change, but never        Li ofThemistocls, The                                                  355, 368, 413-14
                        reform too much at                                       (Plutarch), 362                            Louis XVI, King, 190,
                        once, 392-99                 limelight, image of, 49                                                224, 279, 280, 292,
                        Law 46: Never appear too                                 Lincoln, Abraham, 12, 13,                  294, 349, 368, 369,
                        perfect, 400-409             366                                                                    399, 429
                        Law 47: Do not go past                                   character of, 196-97,                      Louis XVIII, King, 294,
                        the mark you aimed           270                                                                    379, 426
                        for: in victory, lea         Lind, Jenny, 42                                                        Louis-Philippe, King,
                        when to stop, 410-18         Lin Piao, 396                                                          283-84, 287, 426
Law 48: Assume for      ess-                                                     "Lion, the Chamois, and                    love, xx
                        ness, 419-30                                             the Fox, The"                              other people's, vs. their
                        Lawrence, T. E., 372, 373,                               (Krilof, 272-73                            fear, 87
425-26                                                                           lion and the hae, image                    Luce, flenry, 188-89
                        Lawrence, Thomas, 188        of, 234                                                                Lucca, 153
Lawson, John, 86-87                                  lions circle the hesitant                                              luc, 415-16
Lazar, Irving, 273-74                                prey, 228                                                              Ludwig, King, 55, 77-78,
                        Leam to keep people de-                                  Lippi, Fra Filippo, 187, 314               390-91
                        pendent on you               Liszt, Franz, 55, 194                                                  Ludwig Wttgentein: A
                        (Law 1 1), 82-88             Lithuania, 255                                                         Memoir (Malcolm),
                        leaving things alone, 300                                Littl, Brown Book of Anec-                 383
                        Lenclos, Anne de (Ninon      dotes,                      T                              (Fadiman,   Lustig, Victor, 91, 234,
                        de Lenc1os), 17-18,                                      ed.), 32, 165, 255,                        288
                        29, 119, 233-34,             258, 301                                                               ar of mystery surround-
256-58                                               Liu, King, 1 1                                                         ing, 52
system of, 257-58                                                                Liu Pang (flan Ko-tsu),                    Capone and, 90-91
Leo X, Pope, 46, 232                                 108-10                                                                 Eiffel Tower scheme of,
                        Leonardo da Vinci, 33,                                   Lives ote Artists (Vasari),                94, 229-30
                        151, 177, 342                350-51                                                                 Loller and, 275-77
                        "The Chestut and the                                     Loller, flerman, 275-77                    money-copying ma-
                        Fig Tree," 164                                           London, Nazi attacks on,                   chine of, 74-75,
                        "The Nut and the Cam-        106                                                                    276-77
panile," 77                                          Long March, 1 12, 208,
"Liar, The" (Armenian                                422                                                                    MacArthur, Douglas, 354
                        folktale), 256-57            long tme, 295, 296-97                                                  Macheth (Shakespeare), 55
Liberius, Pope, 394                                  Lorca, Ramiro de, 109                                                  McClellan, George, 127,
Lieh Tzu, 294-95                                     Lord, Winston, 32-33                                                   157
lies, 321                                                                        Lorris, Guillaume de, 345                  Maciavelli, Niccolo, xvii,
                        as bodyguard, 106            Louis, Joe, 68                                                         xx, xiii, 11, 87, 109,
                        boldness and, 228            Louis XI, King, 85-86                                                  136, 179, 202, 298,
                        verbal argument and,                                     Louis XII, King, 150-51                    320, 350, 366, 415,
74                                                                               Louis XIII, King, 160, 176,                418
                        Li, Letters, andEpicurean    273-75                                                                 on annihilatng the
                        Philosohy of Ninon de                                    LouisX(Bertrand), 33                       enemy, 1 13
                        Lencos (Lenclos),                                        Louis XIV, King, 9, 180,                   on choice, 261
233-34                                                                           184, 242, 305, 348,                        on Cosimo de' Medici,
                        Li of Alexander the Great,                               349, 353, 374                              404
T                       (Plutarch),                                              as center of actvty,                       on deception, 220
371-72                                                                           132-33, 134                                on dependence, 85
                        Li o Antony (Plutarch),                                  Duc de Luzun ad, 48                        on fortresses, 133, 136
310- 11                                                                          Fouquet and, 2-3, 5                        on going beyond the
                        Li ofJulius Caesar, The                                  generosity of, 342-43                      mark, 417
                        (Plutarch), 278-79                                       Mancini ad, 383-84                         on hiding the tuth, 321
4                       INDEX

on impetuousness vs.          Mareoni, Guglielmo, 57                                   Medici f   a                             ily, 3-4, 175,
eaution, 234                  Maria, Filippo, 126-27                                                                            340, 341, 398, 403-4
on neeessity, 349             Maria Theresa, Empress,                                             Medieis, Catherine de',
on the overreaehing           356-57                                                              214, 277-78
general, 412- 13              Marie-Antoinette, 224,                                              Medieis, Marie de', 273-74
on reform, 396, 397,                                     368-69, 399, 429                         Medusa, 377
399                                                      Marie de' Medicis, 273-74                Meegeren, Han van,
on speetade, 316              maritme warfare, 425                                                268-69
Voltaire on, 322                                         Marlborough, Duehess of,                 meetngs, territory and, 66
magicians, 298                337-38                                                              Mehmed the Conqueror,
magnet, image of, 225                                    Marlborough, Duke of, 21,     297
magnetsm, animal,             337-38                                                              Mellon, Andrew, 28, 102
223-24                        Marranos, 322                                                       Melos, 164-65, 167
Mahabharata,  11- 12          martial arts, 420                                                   Melville, Herman, 408
Make other people come        ma                         dom, 170, 204, 321                       MemoiTs (Casanova),  192
to you-use bait if                                       Mary Queen of Scots, 147                 Menelik 11, King, 288
neeessary (Law 8),            Masa                       une, Date, 246-47,                       Menghuo, K}n                  370-71
62-68                         345                                                                 Meninas, La (Veläzquez),
Make your aeeomplish-         Masayoshi, Hotta, 168                                    196
ments seem effortless         Maque 01 the Red Death,                                             mereenary soldiers {condot-
(Law 30), 245-53              T                          (Poe), 131-33                            tieTt), 83,                   108- 10
Maleolm, Norman, 383          masquerading as a swine                                             "Merehant and His
Mamugna (11 Bragadino),                                  to kill the tiger, 160                                                 Friend, The" (Indian
264-66, 267, 270              Massaere of St.                                                     fable), 377-79
"Man and His Shadow,                                     Bartholomew's Eve,                       Mereury, 425
The" (Kriloff), 306           214                                                                 image of, 430
Manchuria, 422-23             Massagetai, 411-12                                                  merey of others, appealing
Mancini, Baroness,            master{s) :                                                         tO, 95-100
382-83                                                   fiendliness with, 181                    mermaid, 46
Maneini, Marie, 383-84                                   making a gift of your                    Mesmer, Franz, 223-25
Manfedi, Astorre, Pinee,      talent to, 187                                                      MetamoTphoses (Ovid),
5                             outshining of, 1-7                                                  402-4
manipulaton, 66                                          proving dedication to,                   metaphors, 387
Mansart, Jules, 184                                      with exeess of effort,                   Mettemich, Klemens von,
Mantua, 150, 151, 152         416-17                                                              64, 380
Mantua, Duke of, 264,                                    two, satsfing of, 185                    Mexico, 301-2
266, 288-89, 339-40           Master the a of tming                                               Michael 111, Emperor,
"Man Who Loved Money                                     (Law 35), 291-99                         9-10, 13
Better Than Life,                                        Mata Hari, 50-51, 52, 55,                Michelangelo, 71-72, 86,
The" (Chinese fable),         268                                                                 87, 175, 251, 342,
337-38                        Matsumoto, Michihiro,                                               406-8, 409
Mao Tse-tung, 14, 53, 1 13,   336                                                                 Michelozzo, 404
176, 197, 353, 424,                                      Maurer, Christopher, 348                 Milan, 150, 151, 152, 219
430                           Mayer, Louis B., 32                                                 mimiery, 377, 378, 379
father of, 354-55             Mazarin, Jules, 2, 383                                              minds and hearts of ot-
isolation of enemies by,      Medea, 1 18-19                                                      ers, working on,
364                                                      Medici, Cosimo I de', 3, 4,              367-75
Lin Piao and, 396             134-35                                                              mine fl of dia                onds and
Natonalists and, 1 12,        Medici, Cosimo 11 de', 4                                                                          rubies, image of, 43
208-9, 422-23, 424,           Medici, Cosimo de' (the                                             Minerva, 402-4
430                                                      EIder), 341, 398,                        mirrored situatons, dan-
past and, 394-96                                         403-4, 405, 408                          ger of, 390-91
publie emotions and,                                     Medici, Giovanni de', 403                mirror effeet, 376-91
373                           Medici,                    Lrenzo de',                              MiTOTjT Pne, A (Iska-
seapegoats and, 204           341-42                                                              dar),  79
wei-chi and, 424, 426                                    Pope lnnoeent and, 382                   "Miser, The" (Aesop), 335
INDEX                         45

misfortne, 76, 81           Mussolini, Benito, 87                 New lrk Times, 306
mistakes:                   mystery, 50, 52-53, 54,               Ney, Marshai, 63
audacity and, 227           55, 212, 252                          Nicholas I, Czar, 35
concealing of, by use of                                          Nicholas 11, Czar, 364
scapegoat, 201-5,           naVete, xviii-xi                      Nicias, 360
214                         Napoleon I, Emperor,                  Nietzsche, Friedrich, xviii,
fing of, 300, 306           xviii, 13, 22, 68,             110,   xxi, 40
indifference to, 307        112, 174-75, 197,                     on beliefin oneself, 287
taking blame for, 214       251, 283, 284,                        on founding a religion,
Mithras, 394                293-94, 295, 356,                     220
Mi Tzu-hsia, 41             371, 374, 399, 415,                   system of, 257-58
Moctezuma, King, 365        429                                   Nixon, Richard:
Moliere, 2, 18, 257         boar hunt and, 189-90                 China visit of, 61
money, 333-46               boldness of, 233                      Kissinger and, 61, 87,
circulation of, 340         character of, 81                      148-49, 259, 306
emotons and, 342-43,        Fouche spied on by,                   Pentagon Papers and,
344                         379-80                                306
Mongois, 99                 imprisonment and es-                  noble gesture, 28
"Monkey and the Cat,        cape fom Elba,                        Nobunaga, Oda, 416
The" (La Fontaine),         63-64, 65, 66, 184,                   nonchalance, 180
206-7                       294, 379                              Norfleet, J. Frank, 140-41
"Monkey and the Peas,       and power of absence,                 notice, 180
The" (Tolstoy), 304         120                                   notoriety, 45
"Monkey and the Wap,        Talleyrand and Fouche's               "Nut and the Campanile,
The" (Birch), 328           conspiracy aganst,                    The" (Leonardo), 77
monopolies, 88, 259         13, 293-94, 326-27,
Montaigne, 78, 243          330                                   oak tee, image of, 169
Montez, Lola, 55, 77-79,    at Waterloo, 63, 294,                 Obolensky, Ivan, 231
235, 390-91                 327                                   Odysseus, xx, 93, 241
moon, image of, 269         Napoleon 111, Emperor,                Oedipus, 203
Moon Doctor of Berlin       174, 240, 356, 374                    offending the wrong per-
(Dr. Weisleder),            Narcissus effect, 378                 son, 137-44
310-11, 313                 Naväez, Ramon Maria,                  old people vs. young, 353,
moral effect, of mirror,    111                                   357
378-79                      Natonal Gallery ofA                   Old Testament, 23-24
Morgan, J. Pierpont, 57,    (Washington, D.C.),                   On War (Clausewitz), 174
88, 175, 258                28, 102                               opossum, image of, 161
Morphy, Paul, 352-53        nature, 222-23, 247, 250              opponents:
Moses, 1 12, 352            Nazis, 106, 315                       typology of, 138-39
Pharaoh and, 338-40         negotaton, 1 12                       see alo enemies
Mountain Doctor, the        boldness in, 233-34                   options, controlling of,
(Michael Schüp-             territory and, 66                     254-62
pach), 22 1 -23             Neoptolemus, 93                       forms of, 259-61
Mrazek, James, 424          Neue Zürcher Zitun                    Orade at Delphi, image
Mr. Suspicion, dealing      (Rischke), 393-94                     of, 36
with, 138                   neutralizing effect, of mir-          orchestaon of events, 197
Mucianus, Publius Crassus   ror, 377-78                           originality, 317
Dives, 70                   Never appear too perfect              Orleans, Duke of, 260
Muhammad, Shah of           (Law 46), 400-409                     Orton, Joe, 401 -2, 408
Khwarezm, 139-40            Never outshine the master             ostentation, avoiding,
Mulk, Nizam al-, 338-40     (Law 1), 1-7                          179-80
Muqaddimah, The             Never put too much tust               ostrak, 359
(Khaldin), 334-35           in fiends, lea how                    other people:
Musashi, Miyamoto, 78,      to use enemies (Law                   appealing to self-interest
3 79                        2), 8-15                              of, 95-100, 372,
Musset, Alfred de, 194      Newton, Isaac, 60                     373-74
46                          INDEX

becoming foca point of                patters, 28, 126, 128, 129,                      Pisa, 342
their need to believe,                415, 416                                         Pistoia, 153
215-26                                Pausanias, 318-19, 323                           Pizarro, Francisco, 59,
behaving like, while                  pawns, 367, 373                                  238, 335-36,
thinking as you like,        paying   f                             price, 333, 334,   359-60, 365
317-24                                344, 346                                         Bzaro, Gonzalo, 336
commitent to, 145-55                  paying your own way,                             placatng oters, 188
discovering thumb-                    333, 346                                         plain, unassuming, and
screws of, 271-81                     pearls before swine, laying                      often unintelligent
insultng, 142, 143, 159,              of, 321, 323                                     man, deaing with,
189                                   "Peasat ad te Apple                              138-39
keeping them depen-                   Tree, The" (Aesop),                              Pla all the way to the end
dent on you, 82-88           96                                                        (Law 29), 236-44
keeping them in sus-                  Pedrarias (Pedro Aria                            Plack, Max, 398
pended terror,                        Dävila), 238, 239                                planning, 212, 419
123-29                                Peloponnesian War, 97,                           to te end, 236-44
making tem come to                    164, 241                                         flexibility in, 244
you, 62-68                            Peloponnesian War,            T                  and leaing when to
playing to their fa-                  (Thucydides), 98                                 stop, 410-18
tasies, 263-70                        Pentagon Papers, 306                             Play a sucker to catch a
types of, 137-44                      people, see oter people                          sucker-seem
unhappy and unlucky,                  perfecton, appearace of,                         dumber than your
avoidance of, 76-81                   400-409                                          mark (Law 21),
using work of, 56-61                  Pergamus, 70                                     156-62
working on hearts ad                  Pericles, 349-50, 354,                           Play. on people's need to
minds of, 367-75                      359-60, 416                                      believe to create a
overacting, 198                       Perseus, 377, 390                                cultike following
overstepping your bounds,             Pershing, John j., 301, 302                      (Law 27), 215-26
186                                   Persia, 148, 318-19, 351,                        Play te perfect courter
Ovid , 319, 402-4                     359, 381, 382,                                   (Law 24), 178-90
"Owl Who Was God,                     411-12,420,428                                   Play to people's fantasies
The" (Thurber),                       personality, 195                                 (Law 32), 263-70
217-19                                perspective:                                     pleasure, being a source
                                      anger and, 329-30                                of, 182
Pacific Ocean, discovery              isolaton and, 136                                Plutach, 13, 60, 278- 79,
of, 238, 239                          persuasion, 73                                   292-94, 310- 1 1,
Panama, 237                           working on the heats                             349-50, 362, 371-72,
Panchatanta, tale fom,                and minds of others,                             405
2 07-8                                367-75                                           Pockt MirrorJr Heroes, A
parables, see fables and              Peru, 335, 359-60                                (Graciän), 348
folktales                             Perugino, Pietro, 350-51                         Poe, Edgar Allan, 131-33,
Parc aux Cerfs, 348, 414              Peter II, Emperor, 427                           381
parents, stepping into                Pett Trianon, 368                                Poggio, Stefano di, 96-97
shoes of, 347-57                      Petrucci, Pandolfo, 1 1                          Poggio family, 96, 97
Paris, liberaton of, 315              pettness, 338                                    Poland, 255
past:                                 Philip, King of Macedo-                          pollo vaccine, 322
reinterpretation of, 397              nia, 350-52, 416                                 pollteness, 180
support for vaues of,                 Philip 11, King of Spain,                        polltics, abstracton in,
397-98                       353                                                       425
using knowledge fom,                  Philippines, 354                                 Pompadour, Madame de
59-60                                 philosopher's stone, 219,                        Ueanne Poisson),
patence, xxi, 291, 295,      220                                                       348, 413-14, 415
298                                   Phoenicia, 331                                   Pompey, 192, 278-79
patrons, 86, 175, 251, 342            Picasso, Pablo, 48-49,                           pond of fish, image of, 331
Aretino ad, 338-40                    127-28, 149, 355                                 Pontormo, Jacopo da, 135,
gifts to, 288-89                      pickpockets, 66                                  252
INDEX                        4        7

        Portugal, 99                                                           "Purloined Letter, The"             robber barons, 42, 66, 142
        Pose as a fiend, work as a                                             (Poe), 381                          Robert-Houdin, Jean-Eu-
                                        spy (Law 14), 101-6                    purpose, single-minded-             gene, 298
        podatch feasts, 341                                                    ness of, 175, 177                   Robespierre, Maximilien-
        "Power of a Lie, The"                                                  Pynchon, Thomas, 120                Francois-Marie-
        (Jewish folktale),                                                                                         Isidore de, 284,
        223-24                                                                 queen, 426-27                       292-93, 295
        Power of the Chrltan, The                                                                                  Rockefeller, John D., 88,
        (Francesco), 90,                                                       racehorse, image of, 252            259, 298
        220-22                                                                 Raleigh, Walter, 34, 146,           RockefeIler, Nelson, 148
        praise, 405, 408                                                       213, 319, 364, 406                  Rodriguez, Joao, 428
        Peach the need for                                                     Ralston, Willia, 157, 158,          roles, 191, 195
                                        change, but never re-   159                                                Romagna, 202-3
                                        form too much at                       Raphael, 232                        romance, 263
        once (Law 45),                                                         Rput, 364                           Romance of the Rose, The
        392-99                                                                 realit(ies), 263                    (Lorris), 345
        predecessors, stepping                                                 oppressive, fantasies               Roma empire, 172
                                        into shoes of, 347-57                  from, 266-69                        Rome, 150, 152, 192, 393,
        predictability, 123, 125,                                              Rechberg, Otto von, 77              397
        129, 429                                                               Re-create yourself (Lw              Faiscans and, 93
        Prescott, William H.,                                                  25), 191-99                         Hannibal's march on,
        359-60                                                                 red herrings, 17, 21, 28, 30        53-54
        presence, 1 17, 1 19-20, 121,                                          reform, 392-99                      theater in, 192-93
364                                                                            Reformaton, 319                     Rommel, Erwin, 41, 424
        boldness and, 228-29                                                   Reich, Wilhelm, 425                 Ronsard, Pierre de, 312
        spectacles and, 309                                                    religion, 215, 216, 342             Roosevelt, Franklin D., 28,
        prey, hesitant, 228                                                    borrowing forms of, 218             197, 305, 323
        price, settng your own,                                                reputation, 37-43                   dog of, 305-6
289                                                                            for decepton and dis-               Howe and, 204
        "Price of Envy, The" (Jew-                                             honesty, 30, 42                     image of, 204, 284
                                        ish folktale), 153-54                  for independence, 148               Rosenberg, Paul, 127-28
Pnce,   T                               (Machiavelli),                         and keeping your hands              Rothschild, James, 28,
        xxiii, 136, 202                                                        clean, 200-214                      173, 174, 262, 283,
        Poblm of PaulMorphy, The                                               and scapegoat for              t-   340-41, 426
        (Jones), 352-53                                                        ing blame, 201-5,                   Rothschild, Nathan, 157,
        problems, petty, 300                                    214                                                159
        "Podigy Ox, The"                                                       respect, using absence to           Rothschild family, 173-74
        (Kenko), 302-3                                                         increase, 1 15-22                   Rouet, Louise de, 277
        proporton, loss of, 135                                                Retz, Cardinal de, 34, 165,         routine, 126
        proteetion, 177, 421, 422                                              232, 242, 260, 406-7                royalty, actng like,
        fortresses for, 130-36                                                 the Fronde and, 315                 282-90
        Protestantsm, 393-94,                                                  revenge, of enemies, 1 1 1,         Rubens, Peter Paul, 59
398                                                                            1 14, 261, 366                      Rubicon, 192, 198
        Protestant Reformation,                                                revoluton, 397, 398                 rudeness, 180
319                                                             rhy            s, 415, 416                         ruling, for                    ess style of,
        Proteus, image of, 198                                                 Richelieu, Cadinal, 18,             427
        proud and arogant man,                                                 175-76, 241, 273-75                 Russia, 230, 255-56, 327,
        dealing with, 138                                                      plot against, 204                   427
        Pussia, 160, 239-41                                     rigdity, 429                                       in war with Japan,
        Psalmanazar, George,                                                   Rikyu, Sen no, 5-6, 209,            65-66
        267-68                                                                 210, 246, 247,                      Ryleyev, Kondraty, 35
        Ptolemy XII, 206                                                       387-88                              Ryogaku, High Priest, 329
        Ptolemy XIII, 206, 207                                                 Rischke, Anne-Susanne,
        Ptolemy XIV, 207                                                       393-94                              Saadi, 247-48
        Punitive Expediton,                                                    rivals, see enemies                 sacrifice, ritual, 203-4
        301-3                                                                  river, image of, 345                sadists, financial, 335, 338
48      INDEX

Sadler, A. L., 246-47, 313,                           Second Punic Wa, 53            shield of Perseus, image
326-27                                                secret intelligence, 87        of, 390
Saint-Evremond, Seigneur                              Seducer's Mirror, 378,         Shigemune, Itakura,
de, 257                       382, 384                                               326-27
Saint-Simon, Louis de                                 seduction, 18, 233, 364-65     Sho-o, Takeno, 387, 388
Rouvroy, Duc de,                                      working on the hearts          Shu Chan, 141
34, 132-33, 184                                       and minds of others,           Shuisky, Andrei, 231
Salinger, j. D., 120          367-75                                                 Shuisky family, 231
Salk, Jonas, 322, 323, 398    seesaw, image of, 74                                   Shu Kingdom, 38, 370
Samarkand, 139-40                                     Selassie, Haile, 25-27,        Sicily, 172, 241-42, 305,
Sand, George (Aurore                                  288, 327-29                    381, 416
Dupin Dudevant),                                      Selcted Fahl (L Fontaine),     Sicyon, 285-87
194-95, 196, 306                                      see L Fontaine, Jean           Siena, patron saint of, 83
Sanemon, Kawachiya, 210                               de, fables of                  sight, 314
San Lorenzo, 135                                      self-consciousness, 196        silence, 34-35, 36
Sansovino, Jacopo, 339                                self-contol, 152, 153, 155,    Sima Yi, 38-39
Santa Maria deI Fiore,                                167, 182, 196, 243,            simplicity, in creating cult,
66-67, 71                     330                                                    217
sarcasm, 35-36                                        hurrying and, 291              sincerity, 196
Saturalia, 393                self-creation, 191-99                                  frse, 17, 21-22, 30
Sauves, Charlotte de          self-discipline, 337                                   selectve, 89, 90-91
Beaune Semblan<ay                                     self-interest of others, ap-   single-mindedness, 175,
de, 277                                               pering to, 95-100,             177
saying less than necessary,                           372, 373-74                    Sinigaglia,  108-10
31-36                         self-observaton, 181                                   Sistne Chapel, 409
scandr, 45, 48, 49            self-sacrifice, 373                                    Siu, RG.H., 207-8,
scapegoau, 201-5, 214                                 sensation and scandr, 45,      247-48, 295
mistakes in using, 214        48, 49                                                 skills, 86, 184
scarcity, 120-21              senses, 314                                            Slack, John, 157-59,
Schimmel, Solomon, 401                                and creating cult,             160-61
Schleswig-Holstein, 239       217-18                                                 smoke screens, 23, 27, 28,
Schopenhauer, Arthur:                                 serpent with a long mem-       29, 30, 36, 129
on being cheated, 343                                 ory, dering with,              "Snake, the Farmer, and
on combattng and cor-         138                                                    the Heron, The"
rectng others, 321            Sertorius, 292-94                                      (African foiktale), 10
on envy, 405                                          Seven Pillrs 0/ Wisdom         sneak across the ocean in
on gettng others to re-                               (Lawrence), 372                broad daylight, 25
ver themselves, 104           Sevigne, Marquis de,                                   socir circles, fantasy of
on intellect,  157-58, 174    17- 18                                                 adventure vs.,
on a man's handling of        sexurity, 225, 268                                     267-68
trifles, 277                  Seymour, Jane, 394                                     socir movemenu, 295
on politeness and rude-                               Sforza, Lodovico, 150          sociru skills, 134, 184
ness, 180                     Shadow, 377-78                                         Societes of Hamony, 224
on self-interest, 97                                  Shah, Idries, 1 19, 210- 11,   Socrates, 381
on showing anger to-                                  238-39, 305,                   Soderini, Piero, 71-72
ward others, 327                                      319-20, 336-37                 Sodoma, 11, 46
on showing disdain for                                Shakespeare, William, 54,      Soemon, Hoshino, 209-10
others, 304                                           55, 60, 79,  135, 299,         solitude, 133
Schüppach, Michael (the       353                                                    solstice, 393
Mountain Doctor) ,                                    Shaw, George Berard,           So much depends on repu-
221-23                        301                                                    tation-guard it with
science, 398                                          sheep's skin, image of, 29     YOUf life (Law 5),
Scientic Theor andReli-       shepherd, st            g of,                          37-43
gon (Bares), 422              358-66                                                 sophistication, 160-61
Scotland, 147                                         Sherma, William T.,            source of power, stiking
seamless blend, 29            260-61                                                 at, 358-66
INDEX                         49

sour-grapes approach, 306        "How to Broadcast                                            "effortless" accomplish-
Soviet Union, 149                News," 208-9                                                 ments of, 251
Spain, 146, 150, 275, 293,       "The Sultan and the               Fouche and, 13,
320, 326, 327                    Vizier," 70-71                                               293-94, 326, 327
Balboa and, 237-38               success, 414-15, 416                                         informaton-gathering
Jews persecuted in, 322          suckers:                          of, 103-4
and search for EI Do-            playing dumber than,                                         Isabey and, 184-85
rado, 237, 238,                  156-62                                                       July Revoluton and,
335-37                           typology of, 138-39               154
Sparta, 148, 164, 318, 319,      see also con artsts                                          and Napoleon's escape
381-82, 420-22                   Sufi proverb,  12                                            fom Elba, 63, 64, 65
war between Athens               "Sultan and the Vizier,                                      positive qualites of, 81
and, 421-22, 427                 The" (The Subt                                               social connectons of,
Spassky, Boris, 124-26           Ruse: The Book of Ara-            134
spectacles, creaton of,          bic Widom and                     Tannyu,                    Ko, 210,
309-16                           Guil), 70-71                      246-47
Spencer, W B., 140               Sumatra, 352                      tantrums, 327, 329, 331
Spenser, Edmund, 146             sun, image of, 120                taste, jokes about, 181,
spirit of the tmes, 182,         Sung, Emperor, 10-12              186, 189
291, 292, 295                    Sung Yi, 108                      tea bowl, 344
going against, 317               Sun Pin, 330, 332                                            tea ceremony (Cha-no-yu),
paying attention to, 399         Sun-tzu, 105, 1 1 1, 1 12, 172,                              5, 209, 210, 246,
spreatura, 250-51                329, 330, 331, 377,                                          306, 313, 326, 343,
spying, 143                      389, 430                          344, 388
by others, on you, 106           surrender, 163-70                 Teacher's Mirror, 379
on others, 101-6                 suspense, 123-29, 298             teacup, 343-44
squabbles, being drawn           suspicious man, dealing                                      Temple of Health, 220-22
into, 150-54                     with, 138                         tempo, 415
Stalin, Joseph, 73               Suzutomo, Akimoto, 344                                       territory, for meetings, 66
stars in the sky, image of, 6    symbols, 73, 309, 313-16,                                    Tesla, Nikola, 42-43, 48,
Stavisky, Serge, 260             323, 373, 387                                                57-58, 59, 175
Stendhal, 28, 149                images and, 314-15                Test, Fulvio, 186
stepping into a great man's      Syracuse, 305                                                theater, theaticality, 193,
shoes, 347-57                                                      199, 270
Stetten, Baron von, 104          Tacitus, 12                                                  i creatng cult, 218
Stevenson, Robert Louis,         Tadakatsu, Sakai, 246-47          tming and, 197
322                              T'ai Tsung, Emperor, 1 10         Themistocles, 359, 362
Stir up waters to catch fish     talent, 184                       Theoctstus, 9
(Law 39), 325-32                 making a gif of, 187              Theodora, Empress, 9
stopping, afer victory,          and outshining master,                                       thicket of shrubs, image of,
410-18                           1-7                               155
strategy, military, 425-26       Tles ofthe Dervishes (Shah),      ThieT,                     Luis-Adolphe, 242
Strategy of the Crown,           210- 11, 319-20                                              Think as you like but be-
287                              Talleyrand Perigord,                                         have like others
Streetcar Named Desire, A        Charles-Maurice de,                                          (Law 38), 317-24
(Williams) , 355                 13, 22, 28, 293-94,                                          third eye of the spy, image
Strike the shepherd and          379                               of, 105
the sheep will scatter           boar hunt and, 189-90             "Thirty-Six Stategies,
(Law 42), 358-66                 in conspiracy against                                        The" ( TheJapanese
style, changing to fit differ-   Napoleon, 13,                                                Art ofWr), 25
ent people, 180                  293-94, 326-27,                                              Thoreau, Henry David,
Subtl Ruse, The: The Book        330                               408
ofArbic Widom and                conversatonal skills of,          Thucydides, 98, 319
Guil                             103-4                             Thumb, Tom, 46, 270
"God and Abraham,"               dishonest reputaton of,           thumbscrew, image of,
73- 74                           94                                280
450                              INDEX

tumbscrews, 271-81                                                                             "Two Dogs, The" (Krilof,               Vasily III, Grand Duke,
                             Tunder in the Sk (Cleary,                179-80                                                          230-31
trans.),                     138                                                               "Two Frogs, The" (Aesop),              Vega, Garcilaso de la,
Thurber, Ja                  es, 217- 19                              237                                                             138
Thurher Carival, The                                                                           "Two Horses, The" (Tol-                Veläquez, Diego Ro-
                             (Thurber), 217- 19                       stoy), 83                                                       driguez de Silva,
Thu                          eisser, Leonhad, 267                                              types of people, 137-44                196, 354
                             Tiffany, Charles, 157, 158,              Tyre, 331, 332                                                  Venice, 150, 151, 152, 264
159                                                                                                                                   Bragadino and, 264-66,
time, 295                                                                                      Uccello, Paolo, 177, 251               267, 270
end, 296, 298-99                                                      unassuming, plain, and                                          Vermeer, Jan, 268-69
forced, 296, 297-98                                                                            often unintelligent                    Versailles, 2-3, 132-33,
long, 295, 296-97                                                                              man, dealing with,                     134, 135, 184, 349,
timidity, 227, 228, 233,                                              138-39                                                          353, 369, 413
234, 235, 280                                                         unconventional ideas,                                           Parc aux Cerfs at, 348,
timing, 197                                                                                    flauntng of, 3 17-24                   414
mastering the a of,                                                   unhappy and unlucky                                             Petit Trianon at, 368
291-99                                                                                         people, avoiding of,                   Versailles, Treaty of, 1 14
                             tny wound, image of, 308                 76-81                                                           Vettori, Francesco, xx
Titan, 46, 339                                                        uniqueness, 317                                                 victms:
                             Tolstoy, Leo, 83, 152, 304,                                       unpredictability, 123-29               playing dumber tan,
411                                                                   Unpoken Way,             T                              (Mat-   156-62
Tomyris,   ueen, 41 1 -12                                                                      sumoto), 336                           typology of, 138-39
"Tortoise, the Elephant,                                              Urba VIII, Pope, 186                                            Victoria,    ueen, 46, 55,
                             and the Hippopota-                       Urbino, Duke of, 340                                            270
                             mus, The" (Zairean                                                Use absence to increase                victory, lea                   ing when to
fable), 57-58                                                                                  respect and honor                      stop in, 410-18
tadition, 397-98, 399                                                                          (Law 16), 1 15-22                      Vieretta, 1 16
                             Treaur ofJewih Folklore, A                                        Use selectve honesty and               Vietnam Wa, 13, 148
                             (Ausubei, ed.),                                                   generosity to disarm                   Villa, Pancho, 301-3, 306
                             153-54, 201, 223-24                                               your victm (Law                        vines with many thors,
Treaty of Versailles, 1 14                                            12), 89-94                                                      image of, 88
tricks and techniques:                                                                         Use te surrender tactc:                viper crushed beneath
                             concealment of, 245,                                              tansform weakness                      your foot but lef
247, 251-52                                                                                    into power (Law 22),                   alive, image of, 1 13
partal disclosure of,                                                 163-70                                                          Virchow, Rudolf, 255
252-53                                                                                         us-versus-tem dynamic,                 Virgin    ueen, image of,
                             Trojan Horse, image of, 93               218-19                                                          149
"Trout and the Gudgeon,                                               Uzun Hasan, 297                                                 "Virtues of the Cock, The"
                             The" (Dodsley), 296                                                                                      (Chinese parable),
truth, appeal to, 263                                                                          vacuum, cultural, 353-54               117
Ts'ao Ts'ao, 201-2, 203,                                              reform and, 399                                                 virus, image of, 80
330, 372-73                                                                                    vagueness, in creating cult,           Viscont, Primi, 33
                             Tsunehiro, Dainagon, 307                 217                                                             visual images, 309, 313,
Tu   Fu, 365                                                                                   "Vainglorious Cockerel,                314-16
tulipomaia, 120                                                                                The" (Tolstoy), 411                    in creatng cult, 217-18
Turkey, 297, 426                                                      Valois, Charles de,                                             symbols and, 314-15
Turer, Aaron, 45                                                      361-62                                                          Vita diMichelangelo (Con-
Turer, J. M.W                ,                             188, 407                            Valois, Marguerite de, 277             divi), 406-8
turing te other cheek,                                                value, 344                                                      Vitrolles, Baron de, 103
163, 169                                                                                       Vanbrugh, John, 337-38                 Vollad, Ambroise, 260
Tuscany, 361                                                                                   Various Fahls From Various             Voltaire, 3,  10,  165, 374,
21 Histories, 183                                                                              Plces (di Pima, ed.),                  413
"Two Adventurers, The"                                                337-38                                                          on Machiavelli, 322
                             (La Fontaine),                                                    Vasari, Giorgio, 46, 135,              vulgarity, 290
228-29                                                                                         251, 350-51                            vulture, image of, 60
INDEX                        451

                        Vagner, Fchard, 390-91       Veisleder, Dr. (the Moon                               Vork on the hearts and
waiting, 296, 297                                    Doctor of Berlin) ,                                    minds of others (Law
Vales, Pince of, 185                                 310-11, 313                                            43), 367-75
Vang Mang, 397                                       Vellington, Duke of,                                   "Vorks of Amasis, The"
                        Wanin of theMeAes,           184-85                                                 (Herodotus) , 72-73
                        The (Huizinga),              Vellman, Francis L., 412                               Vorld Championship of
311- 12                                              Vestem Union, 28-29                                    Chess, 124-26
warfare, straegy in,                                 Vestnghouse, George, 57       Vorld Var 11, 422
425-26                                               Vhen asking for help, ap-                              London bombings in,
Vahol, Andy, 35                                      peal to people's self-        106
                        Vamer, Jack L., 273-74       interest, never to            MacAu                    ur in, 354
Va                      ke, Martin, 46-47            their mercy or grati-                                  Paris liberaton in, 315
                        Var  of the Spanish Suc-     tude (Law 13),                                         Vren, Christopher, 72-73
cession, 2 1                                         95-100                                                 wrestling master, 247-48
                        Var  of the Three King-      "Vhen the Vaters Vere         writers, 374
doms, 330                                            Changed" (Shah),              Vu, Duke, 92
Varrior's Mirror, 377                                319-20                                                 Vu, Empress (Vu Chao),
                        Vashington, George, 154,     Vhites, the, and the                                   1 10- 1 1, 1 13
198, 407                                             Blacks, 153, 361-62                                    Vu, kingdom of, 168, 172
                        "Vasp and the Prince,        Vilde, Oscar, 43, 324         Vu  Ch'i, 416-17
                        The" (Indian fable),         Villiam I, King of Prussia,   Vuge, 371
45                                                   19, 84, 85, 239,              Vutugu, King, 371
Vatergate, 306                                       279-80                        Vu   Tzu-hsiu, 172
                        Vaterloo, Battle of, 63,     Villiams, Tennessee, 355
294, 327                                             Vilson, Voodrow, 301,                                  Xerxes, King, 318, 428
                        Jter Margin, The, 395        302
weak links, 273                                      Vin through your actions,     Yeats, Villiam Butler,
                        weakness, xviii, 367, 372,   never through argu-           250
400, 426                                             ment (Law 9),                                          "Yellow Kid" Veil, 21-22,
                        of others, discovering,      69-75                                                  212, 269, 275- 76,
271-81                                               withdrawal, 1 15-22, 256                               288, 345, 346
                        recovery from, 209           Vittgenstein, Ludwig,         Yiddish folktale, 201
                        transforming into            383                           Yorinobu, 246-47
                        power, 163-70                Volsey, Cardinal, 393                                  Yoshimoto, General, 416
                        working hard and, 2 1 1      "Volves and the Sheep,                                 young people, 353, 357,
Vei, 370                                             The" (Aesop) , 361            425
                        wei-chi (go), 363, 423-24,   words, images vs., 313        Yu Hsiu Sen,  117
426                                                  working as a spy, while
Veil, Joseph "Yellow                                 posing as a friend,           Zairean fable, 57-58
                        Kid," 2 1-22, 212,           101-6                                                  Zauditu, Empress, 327
                        269, 275-76 288,             working hard, 2 1 1           zeitgeist, 398
345, 346                                             maing accomplish-                                      Zelle, Margaretha (Mata
                        bak re-created by,           ments seem effort-                                     Hari), 50-51, 52, 55,
388-89                                               less, 245-53                  268
                        Geezil and, 23-25, 27        work of others, using,        Zeus, 352
                        newsletter of, 314           56-61                         Zhang Yu, 67
452                     INDEX
